
  "And she showed me her children," said the Doctor of Beauvais,
"and they had heard of me, and had been taught to pity me. When they
passed a prison of the State, they kept far from its frowning walls,
and looked up at its bars, and spoke in whispers. She could never
deliver me; I imagined that she always brought me back after showing
me such things. But then, blessed with the relief of tears, I fell
upon my knees, and blessed her."

  "I am that child, I hope, my father. O my dear, my dear, will you
bless me as fervently to-morrow?"

  "Lucie, I recall these old troubles in the reason that I have
to-night for loving you better than words can tell, and thanking God
for my great happiness. My thoughts, when they were wildest, never
rose near the happiness that I have known with you, and that we have
before us."

  He embraced her, solemnly commended her to Heaven, and humbly
thanked Heaven for having bestowed her on him. By-and-bye, they went
into the house.

  There was no one bidden to the marriage but Mr. Lorry; there was
even to be no bridesmaid but the gaunt Miss Pross. The marriage was to
make no change in their place of residence; they had been able to
extend it, by taking to themselves the upper rooms formerly
belonging to the apocryphal invisible lodger, and they desired nothing
more.

  Doctor Manette was very cheerful at the little supper. They were
only three at table, and Miss Pross made the third. He regretted
that Charles was not there; was more than half disposed to object to
the loving little plot that kept him away; and drank to him
affectionately.

  So, the time came for him to bid Lucie good night, and they
separated. But, in the stillness of the third hour of the morning,
Lucie came downstairs again, and stole into his room; not free from
unshaped fears, beforehand.

  All things, however, were in their places; all was quiet; and he lay
asleep, his white hair picturesque on the untroubled pillow, and his
hands lying quiet on the coverlet. She put her needless candle in
the shadow at a distance, crept up to his bed, and put her lips to
his; then, leaned over him, and looked at him.

  Into his handsome face, the bitter waters of captivity had worn;
but, he covered up their tracks with a determination so strong, that
he held the mastery of them even in his sleep. A more remarkable
face in its quiet, resolute, and guarded struggle with an unseen
assailant, was not to be beheld in all the wide dominions of sleep,
that night.

  She timidly laid her hand on his dear breast, and put up a prayer
that she might ever be as true to him as her love aspired to be, and
as his sorrows deserved. Then, she withdrew her hand, and kissed his
lips once more, and went away. So, the sunrise came, and the shadows
of the leaves of the plane-tree moved upon his face, as softly as
her lips had moved in praying for him.

  XVIII

  NINE DAYS

  THE MARRIAGE-DAY was shining brightly, and they were ready outside
the closed door of the Doctor's room, where he was speaking with
Charles Darnay. They were ready to go to church; the beautiful
bride, Mr. Lorry, and Miss Pross- to whom the event, through a gradual
process of reconcilement to the inevitable, would have been one of
absolute bliss, but for the yet lingering consideration that her
brother Solomon should have been the bridegroom.

  "And so," said Mr. Lorry, who could not sufficiently admire the
bride, and who had been moving round her to take in every point of her
quiet, pretty dress; "and so it was for this, my sweet Lucie, that I
brought you across the Channel, such a baby! Lord bless me! How little
I thought what I was doing! How lightly I valued the obligation I
was conferring on my friend Mr. Charles!"

  "You didn't mean it," remarked the matter-of-fact Miss Pross, "and
therefore how could you know it? Nonsense!"

  "Really? Well; but don't cry," said the gentle Mr. Lorry.

  "I am not crying," said Miss Pross; "you are."

  "I, my Pross?" (By this time, Mr. Lorry dared to be pleasant with
her, on occasion.)

  "You were, just now; I saw you do it, and I don't wonder at it. Such
a present of plate as you have made 'em, is enough to bring tears into
anybody's eyes. There's not a fork or a spoon in the collection," said
Miss Pross, "that I didn't cry over, last night after the box came,
till I couldn't see it."

  "I am highly gratified," said Mr. Lorry, "though, upon my honour,
I had no intention of rendering those trifling articles of remembrance
invisible to any one. Dear me! This is an occasion that makes a man
speculate on all he has lost. Dear, dear, dear! To think that there
might have been a Mrs. Lorry, any time these fifty years almost!"

  "Not at all!" From Miss Pross.

  "You think there never might have been a Mrs. Lorry?" asked the
gentleman of that name.

  "Pooh!" rejoined Miss Pross; "you were a bachelor in your cradle."

  "Well!" observed Mr. Lorry, beamingly adjusting his little wig,
"that seems probable, too."

  "And you were cut out for a bachelor," pursued Miss Pross, "before
you were put in your cradle."

  "Then, I think," said Mr. Lorry, "that I was very unhandsomely dealt
with, and that I ought to have had a voice in the selection of my
pattern. Enough! Now, my dear Lucie," drawing his arm soothingly round
her waist, "I hear them moving in the next room, and Miss Pross and I,
as two formal folks of business, are anxious not to lose the final
opportunity of saying something to you that you wish to hear. You
leave your good father, my dear, in hands as earnest and as loving
as your own; he shall be taken every conceivable care of; during the
next fortnight, while you are in Warwickshire and thereabouts, even
Tellson's shall go to the wall (comparatively speaking) before him.
And when, at the fortnight's end, he comes to join you and your
beloved husband, on your other fortnight's trip in Wales, you shall
say that we have sent him to you in the best health and in the
happiest frame. Now, I hear Somebody's step coming to the door. Let me
kiss my dear girl with an old-fashioned bachelor blessing, before
Somebody comes to claim his own."

  For a moment, he held the fair face from him to look at the
well-remembered expression on the forehead, and then laid the bright
golden hair against his little brown wig, with a genuine tenderness
and delicacy which, if such things be old-fashioned, were as old as
Adam.

  The door of the Doctor's room opened, and he came out with Charles
Darnay. He was so deadly pale- which had not been the case when they
went in together- that no vestige of colour was to be seen in his
face. But, in the composure of his manner he was unaltered, except
that to the shrewd glance of Mr. Lorry it disclosed some shadowy
indication that the old air of avoidance and dread had lately passed
over him, like a cold wind.

  He gave his arm to his daughter, and took her down-stairs to the
chariot which Mr. Lorry had hired in honour of the day. The rest
followed in another carriage, and soon, in a neighbouring church,
where no strange eyes looked on, Charles Darnay and Lucie Manette were
happily married.

  Besides the glancing tears that shone among the smiles of the little
group when it was done, some diamonds, very bright and sparkling,
glanced on the bride's hand, which were newly released from the dark
obscurity of one of Mr. Lorry's pockets. They returned home to
breakfast, and all went well, and in due course the golden hair that
had mingled with the poor shoemaker's white locks in the Paris garret,
were mingled with them again in the morning sunlight, on the threshold
of the door at parting.

  It was a hard parting, though it was not for long. But her father
cheered her, and said at last, gently disengaging himself from her
enfolding arms, "Take her, Charles! She is yours!"

  And her agitated hand waved to them from a chaise window, and she
was gone.

  The corner being out of the way of the idle and curious, and the
preparations having been very simple and few, the Doctor, Mr. Lorry,
and Miss Pross, were left quite alone. It was when they turned into
the welcome shade of the cool old hall, that Mr. Lorry observed a
great change to have come over the Doctor; as if the golden arm
uplifted there, had struck him a poisoned blow.

  He had naturally repressed much, and some revulsion might have
been expected in him when the occasion for repression was gone. But,
it was the old scared lost look that troubled Mr. Lorry; and through
his absent manner of clasping his head and drearily wandering away
into his own room when they got up-stairs, Mr. Lorry was reminded of
Defarge the wine-shop keeper, and the starlight ride.

  "I think," he whispered to Miss Pross, after anxious
consideration, "I think we had best not speak to him just now, or at
all disturb him. I must look in at Tellson's; so I will go there at
once and come back presently. Then, we will take him a ride into the
country, and dine there, and all will be well."

  It was easier for Mr. Lorry to look in at Tellson's, than to look
out of Tellson's. He was detained two hours. When he came back, he
ascended the old staircase alone, having asked no question of the
servant; going thus into the Doctor's rooms, he was stopped by a low
sound of knocking.

  "Good God!" he said, with a start. "What's that?"

  Miss Pross, with a terrified face, was at his ear. "O me, O me!
All is lost!" cried she, wringing her hands. "What is to be told to
Ladybird? He doesn't know me, and is making shoes!"

  Mr. Lorry said what he could to calm her, and went himself into
the Doctor's room. The bench was turned towards the light, as it had
been when he had seen the shoemaker at his work before, and his head
was bent down, and he was very busy.

  "Doctor Manette. My dear friend, Doctor Manette!"

  The Doctor looked at him for a moment- half inquiringly, half as
if he were angry at being spoken to- and bent over his work again.

  He had laid aside his coat and waistcoat; his shirt was open at
the throat, as it used to be when he did that work; and even the old
haggard, faded surface of face had come back to him. He worked hard-
impatiently- as if in some sense of having been interrupted.

  Mr. Lorry glanced at the work in his hand, and observed that it
was a shoe of the old size and shape. He took up another that was
lying by him, and asked what it was.

  "A young lady's walking shoe," he muttered, without looking up.
"It ought to have been finished long ago. Let it be."

  "But, Doctor Manette. Look at me!"

  He obeyed, in the old mechanically submissive manner, without
pausing in his work.

  "You know me, my dear friend? Think again. This is not your proper
occupation. Think, dear friend!"

  Nothing would induce him to speak more. He looked up, for an instant
at a time, when he was requested to do so; but, no persuasion would
extract a word from him. He worked, and worked, and worked, in
silence, and words fell on him as they would have fallen on an
echoless wall, or on the air. The only ray of hope that Mr. Lorry
could discover, was, that he sometimes furtively looked up without
being asked. In that, there seemed a faint expression of curiosity
or perplexity- as though he were trying to reconcile some doubts in
his mind.

  Two things at once impressed themselves on Mr. Lorry, as important
above all others; the first, that this must be kept secret from Lucie;
the second, that it must be kept secret from all who knew him. In
conjunction with Miss Pross, he took immediate steps towards the
latter precaution, by giving out that the Doctor was not well, and
required a few days of complete rest. In aid of the kind deception
to be practised on his daughter, Miss Pross was to write, describing
his having been called away professionally, and referring to an
imaginary letter of two or three hurried lines in his own hand,
represented to have been addressed to her by the same post.

  These measures, advisable to be taken in any case, Mr. Lorry took in
the hope of his coming to himself. If that should happen soon, he kept
another course in reserve; which was, to have a certain opinion that
he thought the best, on the Doctor's case.

  In the hope of his recovery, and of resort to this third course
being thereby rendered practicable, Mr. Lorry resolved to watch him
attentively, with as little appearance as possible of doing so. He
therefore made arrangements to absent himself from Tellson's for the
first time in his life, and took his post by the window in the same
room.

  He was not long in discovering that it was worse than useless to
speak to him, since, on being pressed, he became worried. He abandoned
that attempt on the first day, and resolved merely to keep himself
always before him, as a silent protest against the delusion into which
he had fallen, or was falling. He remained, therefore, in his seat
near the window, reading and writing, and expressing in as many
pleasant and natural ways as he could think of, that it was a free
place.

  Doctor Manette took what was given him to eat and drink, and
worked on, that first day, until it was too dark to see- worked on,
half an hour after Mr. Lorry could not have seen, for his life, to
read or write. When he put his tools aside as useless, until
morning, Mr. Lorry rose and said to him:

  "Will you go out?"

  He looked down at the floor on either side of him in the old manner,
looked up in the old manner, and repeated in the old low voice:

  "Out?"

  "Yes; for a walk with me. Why not?"

  He made no effort to say why not, and said not a word more. But, Mr.
Lorry thought he saw, as he leaned forward on his bench in the dusk,
with his elbows on his knees and his head in his hands, that he was in
some misty way asking himself, "Why not?" The sagacity of the man of
business perceived an advantage here, and determined to hold it.

  Miss Pross and he divided the night into two watches, and observed
him at intervals from the adjoining room. He paced up and down for a
long time before he lay down; but, when he did finally lay himself
down, he fell asleep. In the morning, he was up betimes, and went
straight to his bench and to work.

  On this second day, Mr. Lorry saluted him cheerfully by his name,
and spoke to him on topics that had been of late familiar to them.
He returned no reply, but it was evident that he heard what was
said, and that he thought about it, however confusedly. This
encouraged Mr. Lorry to have Miss Pross in with her work, several
times during the day; at those times, they quietly spoke of Lucie, and
of her father then present, precisely in the usual manner, and as if
there were nothing amiss. This was done without any demonstrative
accompaniment, not long enough, or often enough to harass him; and
it lightened Mr. Lorry's friendly heart to believe that he looked up
oftener, and that he appeared to be stirred by some perception of
inconsistencies surrounding him.

  When it fell dark again, Mr. Lorry asked him as before:

  "Dear Doctor, will you go out?"

  As before, he repeated, "Out?"

  "Yes; for a walk with me. Why not?"

  This time, Mr. Lorry feigned to go out when he could extract no
answer from him, and, after remaining absent for an hour, returned. In
the meanwhile, the Doctor had removed to the seat in the window, and
had sat there looking down at the plane-tree; but, on Mr. Lorry's
return, he slipped away to his bench.

  The time went very slowly on, and Mr. Lorry's hope darkened, and his
heart grew heavier again, and grew yet heavier and heavier every
day. The third day came and went, the fourth, the fifth. Five days,
six days, seven days, eight days, nine days.

  With a hope ever darkening, and with a heart always growing
heavier and heavier, Mr. Lorry passed through this anxious time. The
secret was well kept, and Lucie was unconscious and happy; but he
could not fail to observe that the shoemaker, whose hand had been a
little out at first, was growing dreadfully skilful, and that he had
never been so intent on his work, and that his hands had never been so
nimble and expert, as in the dusk of the ninth evening.

  XIX

  AN OPINION

  WORN OUT by anxious watching, Mr. Lorry fell asleep at his post.
On the tenth morning of his suspense, he was startled by the shining
of the sun into the room where a heavy slumber had overtaken him
when it was dark night.

  He rubbed his eyes and roused himself; but he doubted, when he had
done so, whether he was not still asleep. For, going to the door of
the Doctor's room and looking in, he perceived that the shoemaker's
bench and tools were put aside again, and that the Doctor himself
sat reading at the window. He was in his usual morning dress, and
his face (which Mr. Lorry could distinctly see), though still very
pale, was calmly studious and attentive.

  Even when he had satisfied himself that he was awake, Mr. Lorry felt
giddily uncertain for some few moments whether the late shoemaking
might not be a disturbed dream of his own; for, did not his eyes
show him his friend before him in his accustomed clothing and
aspect, and employed as usual; and was there any sign within their
range, that the change of which he had so strong an impression had
actually happened?

  It was but the inquiry of his first confusion and astonishment,
the answer being obvious. If the impression were not produced by a
real corresponding and sufficient cause, how came he, Jarvis Lorry,
there? How came he to have fallen asleep, in his clothes, on the
sofa in Doctor Manette's consulting-room, and to be debating these
points outside the Doctor's bedroom door in the early morning?

  Within a few minutes, Miss Pross stood whispering at his side. If he
had had any particle of doubt left, her talk would of necessity have
resolved it; but he was by that time clear-headed, and had none. He
advised that they should let the time go by until the regular
breakfast-hour, and should then meet the Doctor as if nothing
unusual had occurred. If he appeared to be in his customary state of
mind, Mr. Lorry would then cautiously proceed to seek direction and
guidance from the opinion he had been, in his anxiety, so anxious to
obtain.

  Miss Pross, submitting herself to his judgment, the scheme was
worked out with care. Having abundance of time for his usual
methodical toilette, Mr. Lorry presented himself at the breakfast-hour
in his usual white linen, and with his usual neat leg. The Doctor
was summoned in the usual way, and came to breakfast.

  So far as it was possible to comprehend him without over stepping
those delicate and gradual approaches which Mr. Lorry felt to be the
only safe advance, he at first supposed that his daughter's marriage
had taken place yesterday. An incidental allusion, purposely thrown
out, to the day of the week, and the day of the month, set him
thinking and counting, and evidently made him uneasy. In all other
respects, however, he was so composedly himself, that Mr. Lorry
determined to have the aid he sought. And that aid was his own.

  Therefore, when the breakfast was done and cleared away, and he
and the Doctor were left together, Mr. Lorry said, feelingly:

  "My dear Manette, I am anxious to have your opinion, in
confidence, on a very curious case in which I am deeply interested;
that is to say, it is very curious to me; perhaps, to your better
information it may be less so."

  Glancing at his hands, which were discoloured by his late work,
the Doctor looked troubled, and listened attentively. He had already
glanced at his hands more than once.

  "Doctor Manette," said Mr. Lorry, touching him affectionately on the
arm, "the case is the case of a particularly dear friend of mine. Pray
give your mind to it, and advise me well for his sake- and above
all, for his daughter's- his daughter's, my dear Manette."

  "If I understand," said the Doctor, in a subdued tone, "some
mental shock--?"

  "Yes!"

  "Be explicit," said the Doctor. "Spare no detail."

  Mr. Lorry saw that they understood one another, and proceeded.

  "My dear Manette, it is the case of an old and a prolonged shock, of
great acuteness and severity to the affections, the feelings, the-
the- as you express it- the mind. The mind. It is the case of a
shock under which the sufferer was borne down, one cannot say for
how long, because I believe he cannot calculate the time himself,
and there are no other means of getting at it. It is the case of a
shock from which the sufferer recovered, by a process that he cannot
trace himself- as I once heard him publicly relate in a striking
manner. It is the case of a shock from which he has recovered, so
completely, as to be a highly intelligent man, capable of close
application of mind, and great exertion of body, and of constantly
making fresh additions to his stock of knowledge, which was already
very large. But, unfortunately, there has been," he paused and took
a deep breath- "a slight relapse."

  The Doctor, in a low voice, asked, "Of how long duration?"

  "Nine days and nights."

  "How did it show itself? I infer," glancing at his hands again,
"in the resumption of some old pursuit connected with the shock?"

  "That is the fact."

  "Now, did you ever see him," asked the Doctor, distinctly and
collectedly, though in the same low voice, "engaged in that pursuit
originally?"

  "Once."

  "And when the relapse fell on him, was he in most respects -or in
all respects- as he was then?"

  "I think in all respects."

  "You spoke of his daughter. Does his daughter know of the relapse?"

  "No. It has been kept from her, and I hope will always be kept
from her. It is known only to myself, and to one other who may be
trusted."

  The Doctor grasped his hand, and murmured, "That was very kind. That
was very thoughtful!" Mr. Lorry grasped his hand in return, and
neither of the two spoke for a little while.

  "Now, my dear Manette," said Mr. Lorry, at length, in his most
considerate and most affectionate way, "I am a mere man of business,
and unfit to cope with such intricate and difficult matters. I do
not possess the kind of information necessary; I do not possess the
kind of intelligence; I want guiding. There is no man in this world on
whom I could so rely for right guidance, as on you. Tell me, how
does this relapse come about? Is there danger of another? Could a
repetition of it be prevented? How should a repetition of it be
treated? How does it come about at all? What can I do for my friend?
No man ever can have been more desirous in his heart to serve a
friend, than I am to serve mine, if I knew how. But I don't know how
to originate, in such a case. If your sagacity, knowledge, and
experience, could put me on the right track, I might be able to do
so much; unenlightened and undirected, I can do so little. Pray
discuss it with me; pray enable me to see it a little more clearly,
and teach me how to be a little more useful."

  Doctor Manette sat meditating after these earnest words were spoken,
and Mr. Lorry did not press him.

  "I think it probable," said the Doctor, breaking silence with an
effort, "that the relapse you have described, my dear friend, was
not quite unforeseen by its subject."

  "Was it dreaded by him?" Mr. Lorry ventured to ask.

  "Very much." He said it with an involuntary shudder.

  "You have no idea how such an apprehension weighs on the
sufferer's mind, and how difficult- how almost impossible- it is,
for him to force himself to utter a word upon the topic that oppresses
him."

  "Would he," asked Mr. Lorry, "be sensibly relieved if he could
prevail upon himself to impart that secret brooding to any one, when
it is on him?"

  "I think so. But it is, as I have told you, next to impossible. I
even believe it- in some cases- to be quite impossible."

  "Now," said Mr. Lorry, gently laying his hand on the Doctor's arm
again, after a short silence on both sides, "to what would you refer
this attack?"

  "I believe," returned Doctor Manette, "that there had been a
strong and extraordinary revival of the train of thought and
remembrance that was the first cause of the malady. Some intense
associations of a most distressing nature were vividly recalled, I
think. It is probable that there had long been a dread lurking in
his mind, that those associations would be recalled- say, under
certain circumstances- say, on a particular occasion. He tried to
prepare himself in vain; perhaps the effort to prepare himself made
him less able to bear it."

  "Would he remember what took place in the relapse?" asked Mr. Lorry,
with natural hesitation.

  The Doctor looked desolately round the room, shook his head, and
answered, in a low voice, "Not at all."

  "Now, as to the future," hinted Mr. Lorry.

  "As to the future," said the Doctor, recovering firmness, "I
should have great hope. As it pleased Heaven in its mercy to restore
him so soon, I should have great hope. He, yielding under the pressure
of a complicated something, long dreaded and long vaguely foreseen and
contended against, and recovering after the cloud had burst and
passed, I should hope that the worst was over."

  "Well, well! That's good comfort. I am thankful!" said Mr. Lorry.

  "I am thankful!" repeated the Doctor, bending his head with
reverence.

  "There are two other points," said Mr. Lorry, "on which I am anxious
to be instructed. I may go on?"

  "You cannot do your friend a better service." The Doctor gave him
his hand.

  "To the first, then. He is of a studious habit, and unusually
energetic; he applies himself with great ardour to the acquisition
of professional knowledge, to the conducting of experiments, to many
things. Now, does he do too much?"

  "I think not. It may be the character of his mind, to be always in
singular need of occupation. That may be, in part, natural to it; in
part, the result of affliction. The less it was occupied with
healthy things, the more it would be in danger of turning in the
unhealthy direction. He may have observed himself, and made the
discovery."

  "You are sure that he is not under too great a strain?"

  "I think I am quite sure of it."

  "My dear Manette, if he were overworked now-"

  "My dear Lorry, I doubt if that could easily be. There has been a
violent stress in one direction, and it needs a counterweight."

  "Excuse me, as a persistent man of business. Assuming for a
moment, that he was overworked; it would show itself in some renewal
of this disorder?"

  "I do not think so. I do not think," said Doctor Manette with the
firmness of self-conviction, "that anything but the one train of
association would renew it. I think that, henceforth, nothing but some
extraordinary jarring of that chord could renew it. After what has
happened, and after his recovery, I find it difficult to imagine any
such violent sounding of that string again. I trust, and I almost
believe, that the circumstances likely to renew it are exhausted."

  He spoke with the diffidence of a man who knew how slight a thing
would overset the delicate organisation of the mind, and yet with
the confidence of a man who had slowly won his assurance out of
personal endurance and distress. It was not for his friend to abate
that confidence. He professed himself more relieved and encouraged
than he really was, and approached his second and last point. He
felt it to be the most difficult of all; but, remembering his old
Sunday morning conversation with Miss Pross, and remembering what he
had seen in the last nine days, he knew that he must face it.

  "The occupation resumed under the influence of this passing
affection so happily recovered from," said Mr. Lorry, clearing his
throat, "we will call- Blacksmith's work, Blacksmith's work. We will
say, to put a case and for the sake of illustration, that he had
been used, in his bad time, to work at a little forge. We will say
that he was unexpectedly found at his forge again. Is it not a pity
that he should keep it by him?"

  The Doctor shaded his forehead with his hand, and beat his foot
nervously on the ground.

  "He has always kept it by him," said Mr. Lorry, with an anxious look
at his friend. "Now, would it not be better that he should let it go?"

  Still, the Doctor, with shaded forehead, beat his foot nervously
on the ground.

  "You do not find it easy to advise me?" said Mr. Lorry. "I quite
understand it to be a nice question. And yet I think--" And there he
shook his head, and stopped.

  "You see," said Doctor Manette, turning to him after an uneasy
pause, "it is very hard to explain, consistently, the innermost
workings of this poor man's mind. He once yearned so frightfully for
that occupation, and it was so welcome when it came; no doubt it
relieved his pain so much, by substituting the perplexity of the
fingers for the perplexity of the brain, and by substituting, as he
became more practised, the ingenuity of the hands, for the ingenuity
of the mental torture; that he has never been able to bear the thought
of putting it quite out of his reach. Even now, when I believe he is
more hopeful of himself than he has ever been, and even speaks of
himself with a kind of confidence, the idea that he might need that
old employment, and not find it, gives him a sudden sense of terror,
like that which one may fancy strikes to the heart of a lost child."

  He looked like his illustration, as he raised his eyes to Mr.
Lorry's face.

  "But may not- mind! I ask for information, a plodding man of
business who only deals with such material objects guineas, shillings,
and bank-notes- may not the retention of the thing involve the
retention of the idea? If the thing were gone, my dear Manette,
might not the fear go with it? In short, is it not a concession to the
misgiving, to keep the forge?"

  There was another silence.

  "You see, too," said the Doctor, tremulously, "it is such an old
companion."

  "I would not keep it," said Mr. Lorry, shaking his head; for he
gained in firmness as he saw the Doctor disquieted. "I would recommend
him to sacrifice it. I only want your authority. I am sure it does
no good. Come! Give me your authority, like a dear good man. For his
daughter's sake, my dear Manette!"

  Very strange to see what a struggle there was within him!

  "In her name, then, let it be done; I sanction it. But, I would
not take it away while he was present. Let it be removed when he is
not there; let him miss his old companion after an absence."

  Mr. Lorry readily engaged for that, and the conference was ended.
They passed the day in the country, and the Doctor was quite restored.
On the three following days he remained perfectly well, and on the
fourteenth day he went away to join Lucie and her husband. The
precaution that had been taken to account for his silence, Mr. Lorry
had previously explained to him, and he had written to Lucie in
accordance with it, and she had no suspicions.

  On the night of the day on which he left the house, Mr. Lorry went
into his room with a chopper, saw, chisel, and hammer, attended by
Miss Pross carrying a light. There, with closed doors, and in a
mysterious and guilty manner, Mr. Lorry hacked the shoemaker's bench
to pieces, while Miss Pross held the candle as if she were assisting
at a murder for which, indeed, in her grimness, she was no
unsuitable figure. The burning of the body (previously reduced to
pieces convenient for the purpose) was commenced without delay in
the kitchen fire; and the tools, shoes, and leather, were buried in
the garden. So wicked do destruction and secrecy appear to honest
minds, that Mr. Lorry and Miss Pross, while engaged in the
commission of their deed and in the removal of its traces, almost
felt, and almost looked, like accomplices in a horrible crime.

  XX

  A PLEA

  WHEN the newly-married pair came home, the first person who
appeared, to offer his congratulations, was Sydney Carton. They had
not been at home many hours, when he presented himself. He was not
improved in habits, or in looks, or in manner; but there was a certain
rugged air of fidelity about him, which was new to the observation
of Charles Darnay.

  He watched his opportunity of taking Darnay aside into a window, and
of speaking to him when no one overheard.

  "Mr. Darnay," said Carton, "I wish we might be friends."

  "We are already friends, I hope."

  "You are good enough to say so, as a fashion of speech; but, I don't
mean any fashion of speech. Indeed, when I say I wish we might be
friends, I scarcely mean quite that, either."

  Charles Darnay- as was natural- asked him, in all good-humour and
good-fellowship, what he did mean?

  "Upon my life," said Carton, smiling, "I find that easier to
comprehend in my own mind, than to convey to yours. However, let me
try. You remember a certain famous occasion when I was more drunk
than- than usual?"

  "I remember a certain famous occasion when you forced me to
confess that you had been drinking."

  "I remember it too. The curse of those occasions is heavy upon me,
for I always remember them. I hope it may be taken into account one
day, when all days are at an end for me! Don't be alarmed; I am not
going to preach."

  "I am not at all alarmed. Earnestness in you, is anything but
alarming to me."

  "Ah!" said Carton, with a careless wave of his hand, as if he
waved that away. "On the drunken occasion in question (one of a
large number, as you know), I was insufferable about liking you, and
not liking you. I wish you would forget it."

  "I forgot it long ago."

  "Fashion of speech again! But, Mr. Darnay, oblivion is not so easy
to me, as you represent it to be to you. I have by no means
forgotten it, and a light answer does not help me to forget it."

  "If it was a light answer," returned Darnay, "I beg your forgiveness
for it. I had no other object than to turn a slight thing, which, to
my surprise, seems to trouble you too much, aside. I declare to you,
on the faith of a gentleman, that I have long dismissed it from my
mind. Good Heaven, what was there to dismiss! Have I had nothing
more important to remember, in the great service you rendered me
that day?"

  "As to the great service," said Carton, "I am bound to avow to
you, when you speak of it in that way, that it was mere professional
claptrap, I don't know that I cared what became of you, when I
rendered it. Mind! I say when I rendered it; I am speaking of the
past."

  "You make light of the obligation," returned Darnay, "but I will not
quarrel with your light answer."

  "Genuine truth, Mr. Darnay, trust me! I have gone aside from my
purpose; I was speaking about our being friends. Now, you know me; you
know I am incapable of all the higher and better flights of men. If
you doubt it, ask Stryver, and he'll tell you so."

  "I prefer to form my own opinion, without the aid of his."

  "Well! At any rate you know me as a dissolute dog, who has never
done any good, and never will."

  "I don't know that you 'never will.'"

  "But I do, and you must take my word for it. Well! If you could
endure to have such a worthless fellow, and a fellow of such
indifferent reputation, coming and going at odd times, I should ask
that I might be permitted to come and go as a privileged person
here; that I might be regarded as an useless (and I would add, if it
were not for the resemblance I detected between you and me, an
unornamental) piece of furniture, tolerated for its old service, and
taken no notice of. I doubt if I should abuse the permission. It is
a hundred to one if I should avail myself of it four times in a
year. It would satisfy me, I dare say, to know that I had it."

  "Will you try?"

  "That is another way of saying that I am placed on the footing I
have indicated. I thank you, Darnay. I may use that freedom with
your name?"

  "I think so, Carton, by this time."

  They shook hands upon it, and Sydney turned away. Within a minute
afterwards, he was, to all outward appearance, as unsubstantial as
ever.

  When he was gone, and in the course of an evening passed with Miss
Pross, the Doctor, and Mr. Lorry, Charles Darnay made some mention
of this conversation in general terms, and spoke of Sydney Carton as a
problem of carelessness and recklessness. He spoke of him, in short,
not bitterly or meaning to bear hard upon him, but as anybody might
who saw him as he showed himself.

  He had no idea that this could dwell in the thoughts of his fair
young wife; but, when he afterwards joined her in their own rooms,
he found her waiting for him with the old pretty lifting of the
forehead strongly marked.

  "We are thoughtful to-night!" said Darnay, drawing his arm about
her.

  "Yes, dearest Charles," with her hands on his breast, and the
inquiring and attentive expression fixed upon him; "we are rather
thoughtful tonight, for we have something on our mind to-night."

  "What is it, my Lucie?"

  "Will you promise not to press one question on me, if I beg you
not to ask it?"

  "Will I promise? What will I not promise to my Love?"

  What, indeed, with his hand putting aside the golden hair from the
cheek, and his other hand against the heart that beat for him!

  "I think, Charles, poor Mr. Carton deserves more consideration and
respect than you expressed for him to-night."

  "Indeed, my own? Why so?"

  "That is what you are not to ask me. But I think- I know- he does."

  "If you know it, it is enough. What would you have me do, my Life?"

  "I would ask you, dearest, to be very generous with him always,
and very lenient on his faults when he is not by. I would ask you to
believe that he has a heart he very, very seldom reveals, and that
there are deep wounds in it. My dear, I have seen it bleeding."

  "It is a painful reflection to me," said Charles Darnay, quite
astounded, "that I should have done him any wrong. I never thought
this of him."

  "My husband, it is so. I fear he is not to be reclaimed; there is
scarcely a hope that anything in his character or fortunes is
reparable now. But, I am sure that he is capable of good things,
gentle things, even magnanimous things."

  She looked so beautiful in the purity of her faith in this lost man,
that her husband could have looked at her as she was for hours.

  "And, O my dearest Love!" she urged, clinging nearer to him,
laying her head upon his breast, and raising her eyes to his,
"remember how strong we are in our happiness, and how weak he is in
his misery!"

  The supplication touched him home. "I will always remember it,
dear Heart! I will remember it as long as I live."

  He bent over the golden head, and put the rosy lips to his, and
folded her in his arms. If one forlorn wanderer then pacing the dark
streets, could have heard her innocent disclosure, and could have seen
the drops of pity kissed away by her husband from the soft blue eyes
so loving of that husband, he might have cried to the night- and the
words would not have parted from his lips for the first time-

  "God bless her for her sweet compassion!"

  XXI

  ECHOING FOOTSTEPS

  A WONDERFUL CORNER for echoes, it has been remarked, that corner
where the Doctor lived. Ever busily winding the golden thread which
bound her husband, and her father, and herself, and her old directress
and companion, in a life of quiet bliss, Lucie sat in the still
house in the tranquilly resounding corner, listening to the echoing
footsteps of years.

  At first, there were times, though she was a perfectly happy young
wife, when her work would slowly fall from her hands, and her eyes
would be dimmed. For, there was something coming in the echoes,
something light, afar off, and scarcely audible yet, that stirred
her heart too much. Fluttering hopes and doubts- hopes, of a love as
yet unknown to her: doubts, of her remaining upon earth, to enjoy that
new delight-divided her breast. Among the echoes then, there would
arise the sound of footsteps at her own early grave; and thoughts of
the husband who would be left so desolate, and who would mourn for her
so much, swelled to her eyes, and broke like waves.

  That time passed, and her little Lucie lay on her bosom. Then, among
the advancing echoes, there was the tread of her tiny feet and the
sound of her prattling words. Let greater echoes resound as they
would, the young mother at the cradle side could always hear those
coming. They came, and the shady house was sunny with a child's laugh,
and the Divine friend of children, to whom in her trouble she had
confided hers, seemed to take her child in his arms, as He took the
child of old, and made it a sacred joy to her.

  Ever busily winding the golden thread that bound them all
together, weaving the service of her happy influence through the
tissue of all their lives, and making it predominate nowhere, Lucie
heard in the echoes of years none but friendly and soothing sounds.
Her husband's step was strong and prosperous among them; her
father's firm and equal. Lo, Miss Pross, in harness of string,
awakening the echoes, as an unruly charger, whip-corrected, snorting
and pawing the earth under the plane-tree in the garden!

  Even when there were sounds of sorrow among the rest, they were
not harsh nor cruel. Even when golden hair, like her own, lay in a
halo on a pillow round the worn face of a little boy, and he said,
with a radiant smile, "Dear papa and mamma, I am very sorry to leave
you both, and to leave my pretty sister; but I am called, and I must
go!" those were not tears all of agony that wetted his young
mother's cheek, as the spirit departed from her embrace that had
been entrusted to it. Suffer them and forbid them not. They see my
Father's face. O Father, blessed words!

  Thus, the rustling of an Angel's wings got blended with the other
echoes, and they were not wholly of earth, but had in them that breath
of Heaven. Sighs of the winds that blew over a little garden-tomb were
mingled with them also, and both were audible to Lucie, in a hushed
murmur-like the breathing of a summer sea asleep upon a sandy shore-
as the little Lucie, comically studious at the task of the morning, or
dressing a doll at her mother's footstool, chattered in the tongues of
the Two Cities that were blended in her life.

  The Echoes rarely answered to the actual tread of Sydney Carton.
Some half-dozen times a year, at most, he claimed his privilege of
coming in uninvited, and would sit among them through the evening,
as he had once done often. He never came there heated with wine. And
one other thing regarding him was whispered in the echoes, which has
been whispered by all true echoes for ages and ages.

  No man ever really loved a woman, lost her, and knew her with a
blameless though an unchanged mind, when she was a wife and a
mother, but her children had a strange sympathy with him- an
instinctive delicacy of pity for him. What fine hidden sensibilities
are touched in such a case, no echoes tell; but it is so, and it was
so here. Carton was the first stranger to whom little Lucie held out
her chubby arms, and he kept his place with her as she grew. The
little boy had spoken of him, almost at the last. "Poor Carton! Kiss
him for me!"

  Mr. Stryver shouldered his way through the law, like some great
engine forcing itself through turbid water, and dragged his useful
friend in his wake, like a boat towed astern. As the boat so
favoured is usually in a rough plight, and mostly under water, so,
Sydney had a swamped life of it. But, easy and strong custom,
unhappily so much easier and stronger in him than any stimulating
sense of desert or disgrace, made it the life he was to lead; and he
no more thought of emerging from his state of lion's jackal, than
any real jackal may be supposed to think of rising to be a lion.
Stryver was rich; had married a florid widow with property and three
boys, who had nothing particularly shining about them but the straight
hair of their dumpling heads.

  These three young gentlemen, Mr. Stryver, exuding patronage of the
most offensive quality from every pore, had walked before him like
three sheep to the quiet corner in Soho, and had offered as pupils
to Lucie's husband: delicately saying "Halloa! here are three lumps of
bread-and-cheese towards your matrimonial picnic, Darnay!" The
polite rejection of the three lumps of bread-and-cheese had quite
bloated Mr. Stryver with indignation, which he afterwards turned to
account in the training of the young gentlemen, by directing them to
beware of the pride of Beggars, like that tutor-fellow. He was also in
the habit of declaiming to Mrs. Stryver, over his full-bodied wine, on
the arts Mrs. Darnay had once put in practice to "catch" him, and on
the diamond-cut-diamond arts in himself, madam, which had rendered him
"not to be caught." Some of his King's Bench familiars, who were
occasionally parties to the full-bodied wine and the lie, excused
him for the latter by saying that he had told it so often, that he
believed it himself- which is surely such an incorrigible
aggravation of an originally bad offence, as to justify any such
offender's being carried off to some suitably retired spot, and
there hanged out of the way.

  These were among the echoes to which Lucie, sometimes pensive,
sometimes amused and laughing, listened in the echoing corner, until
her little daughter was six years old. How near to her heart the
echoes of her child's tread came, and those of her own dear
father's, always active and self-possessed, and those of her dear
husband's, need not be told. Nor, how the lightest echo of their
united home, directed by herself with such a wise and elegant thrift
that it was more abundant than any waste, was music to her. Nor, how
there were echoes all about her, sweet in her ears, of the many
times her father had told her that he found her more devoted to him
married (if that could be) than single, and of the many times her
husband had said to her that no cares and duties seemed to divide
her love for him or her help to him, and asked her "What is the
magic secret, my darling, of your being everything to all of us, as if
there were only one of us, yet never seeming to be hurried, or to have
too much to do?"

  But, there were other echoes, from a distance, that rumbled
menacingly in the corner all through this space of time. And it was
now, about little Lucie's sixth birthday, that they began to have an
awful sound, as of a great storm in France with a dreadful sea rising.

  On a night in mid-July, one thousand seven hundred and
eighty-nine, Mr. Lorry came in late, from Tellson's, and sat himself
down by Lucie and her husband in the dark window. It was a hot, wild
night, and they were all three reminded of the old Sunday night when
they had looked at the lightning from the same place.

  "I began to think," said Mr. Lorry, pushing his brown wig back,
"that I should have to pass the night at Tellson's. We have been so
fun of business all day, that we have not known what to do first, or
which way to turn. There is such an uneasiness in Paris, that we
have actually a run of confidence upon us! Our customers over there,
seem not to be able to confide their property to us fast enough. There
is positively a mania among some of them for sending it to England."

  "That has a bad look," said Darnay.

  "A bad look, you say, my dear Darnay? Yes, but we don't know what
reason there is in it. People are so unreasonable! Some of us at
Tellson's are getting old, and we really can't be troubled out of
the ordinary course without due occasion."

  "Stiff," said Darnay, "you know how gloomy and threatening the sky
is."

  "I know that, to be sure," assented Mr. Lorry, trying to persuade
himself that his sweet temper was soured, and that he grumbled, "but I
am determined to be peevish after my long day's botheration. Where
is Manette?"

  "Here he is," said the Doctor, entering the dark room at the moment.

  "I am quite glad you are at home; for these hurries and
forebodings by which I have been surrounded all day long, have made me
nervous without reason. You are not going out, I hope?"

  "No; I am going to play backgammon with you, if you like," said
the Doctor.

  "I don't think I do like, if I may speak my mind. I am not fit to be
pitted against you to-night. Is the teaboard still there, Lucie? I
can't see."

  "Of course, it has been kept for you."

  "Thank ye, my dear. The precious child is safe in bed?"

  "And sleeping soundly."

  "That's right; all safe and well! I don't know why anything should
be otherwise than safe and well here, thank God; but I have been so
put out all day, and I am not as young as I was! My tea, my dear!
Thank ye. Now, come and take your place in the circle, and let us
sit quiet, and hear the echoes about which you have your theory."

  "Not a theory; it was a fancy."

  "A fancy, then, my wise pet," said Mr. Lorry, patting her hand.
"They are very numerous and very loud, though, are they not? Only hear
them!

  Headlong, mad, and dangerous footsteps to force their way into
anybody's life, footsteps not easily made clean again if once
stained red, the footsteps raging in Saint Antoine afar off, as the
little circle sat in the dark London window.

  Saint Antoine had been, that morning, a vast dusky mass of
scarecrows heaving to and fro, with frequent gleams of light above the
billowy heads, where steel blades and bayonets shone in the sun. A
tremendous roar arose from the throat of Saint Antoine, and a forest
of naked arms struggled in the air like shrivelled branches of trees
in a winter wind: all the fingers convulsively clutching at every
weapon or semblance of a weapon that was thrown up from the depths
below, no matter how far off.

  Who gave them out, whence they last came, where they began,
through what agency they crookedly quivered and jerked, scores at a
time, over the heads of the crowd, like a kind of lightning, no eye in
the throng could have told; but, muskets were being distributed- so
were cartridges, powder, and ball, bars of iron and wood, knives,
axes, pikes, every weapon that distracted ingenuity could discover
or devise. People who could lay hold of nothing else, set themselves
with bleeding hands to force stones and bricks out of their places
in walls. Every pulse and heart in Saint Antoine was on high-fever
strain and at high-fever heat. Every living creature there held life
as of no account, and was demented with a passionate readiness to
sacrifice it.

  As a whirlpool of boiling waters has a centre point, so, all this
raging circled round Defarge's wine-shop, and every human drop in
the caldron had a tendency to be sucked towards the vortex where
Defarge himself, already begrimed with gunpowder and sweat, issued
orders, issued arms, thrust this man back, dragged this man forward,
disarmed one to arm another, laboured and strove in the thickest of
the uproar.

  "Keep near to me, Jacques Three," cried Defarge; "and do you,
Jacques One and Two, separate and put yourselves at the head of as
many of these patriots as you can. Where is my wife?"

  "Eh, well! Here you see me!" said madame, composed as ever, but
not knitting to-day. Madame's resolute right hand was occupied with an
axe, in place of the usual softer implements, and in her girdle were a
pistol and a cruel knife.

  "Where do you go, my wife?"

  "I go," said madame, "with you at present. You shall see me at the
head of women, by-and-bye."

  "Come, then!" cried Defarge, in a resounding voice. "Patriots and
friends, we are ready! The Bastille!"

  With a roar that sounded as if all the breath in France had been
shaped into the detested word, the living sea rose, wave on wave,
depth on depth, and overflowed the city to that point. Alarm-bells
ringing, drums beating, the sea raging and thundering on its new
beach, the attack begun.

  Deep ditches, double drawbridge, massive stone walls, eight great
towers, cannon, muskets, fire and smoke. Through the fire and
through the smoke- in the fire and in the smoke, for the sea cast
him up against a cannon, and on the instant he became a cannonier-
Defarge of the wineshop worked like a manful soldier, Two fierce
hours.

  Deep ditch, single drawbridge, massive stone walls, eight great
towers, cannon, muskets, fire and smoke. One drawbridge down! "Work,
comrades all, work! Work, Jacques One, Jacques Two, Jacques One
Thousand, Jacques Two Thousand, Jacques, Jacques Five-and-Twenty
Thousand; in the name of all the Angels or the Devils- which you
prefer- work!" Thus Defarge of the wine-shop, still at his gun,
which had long grown hot.

  "To me, women!" cried madame his wife. "What! We can kill as well as
the men when the place is taken!" And to her, with a shrill thirsty
cry, trooping women variously armed, but all armed alike in hunger and
revenge.

  Cannon, muskets, fire and smoke; but, still the deep ditch, the
single drawbridge, the massive stone walls, and the eight great
towers. Slight displacements of the raging sea, made by the falling
wounded. Flashing weapons, blazing torches, smoking waggonloads of wet
straw, hard work at neighbouring barricades in all directions,
shrieks, volleys, execrations, bravery without stint, boom smash and
rattle, and the furious sounding of the living sea; but, still the
deep ditch, and the single drawbridge, and the massive stone walls,
and the eight great towers, and still Defarge of the wine-shop at
his gun, grown doubly hot by the service of Four fierce hours.

  A white flag from within the fortress, and a parley- this dimly
perceptible through the raging storm, nothing audible in it-
suddenly the sea rose immeasurably wider and higher, and swept Defarge
of the wine-shop over the lowered drawbridge, past the massive stone
outer walls, in among the eight great towers surrendered!

  So resistless was the force of the ocean bearing him on, that even
to draw his breath or turn his head was as impracticable as if he
had been struggling in the surf at the South Sea, until he was
landed in the outer courtyard of the Bastille. There, against an angle
of a wall, he made a struggle to look about him. Jacques Three was
nearly at his side; Madame Defarge, still heading some of her women,
was visible in the inner distance, and her knife was in her hand.
Everywhere was tumult, exultation, deafening and maniacal
bewilderment, astounding noise, yet furious dumb-show.

  "The Prisoners!"

  "The Records!"

  "The secret cells!"

  "The instruments of torture!"

  "The Prisoners!"

  Of all these cries, and ten thousand incoherences, "The
Prisoners!" was the cry most taken up by the sea that rushed in, as if
there were an eternity of people, as well as of time and space. When
the foremost billows rolled past, bearing the prison officers with
them, and threatening them all with instant death if any secret nook
remained undisclosed, Defarge laid his strong hand on the breast of
one of these men- a man with a grey head, who had a lighted torch in
his hand- separated him from the rest, and got him between himself and
the wall.

  "Show me the North Tower!" said Defarge. "Quick!"

  "I will faithfully," replied the man, "if you will come with me. But
there is no one there."

  "What is the meaning of One Hundred and Five, North Tower?" asked
Defarge. "Quick!"

  "The meaning, monsieur?"

  "Does it mean a captive, or a place of captivity? Or do you mean
that shall strike you dead?"

  "Kill him!" croaked Jacques Three, who had come close up.

  "Monsieur, it is a cell."

  "Show it me!"

  "Pass this way, then."

  Jacques Three, with his usual craving on him, and evidently
disappointed by the dialogue taking a turn that did not seem to
promise bloodshed, held by Defarge's arm as he held by the
turnkey's. Their three heads had been close together during this brief
discourse, and it had been as much as they could do to hear one
another, even then: so tremendous was the noise of the living ocean,
in its irruption into the Fortress, and its inundation of the courts
and passages and staircases. All around outside, too, it beat the
walls with a deep, hoarse roar, from which, occasionally, some partial
shouts of tumult broke and leaped into the air like spray.

  Through gloomy vaults where the light of day had never shone, past
hideous doors of dark dens and cages, down cavernous flights of steps,
and again up steep rugged ascents of stone and brick, more like dry
waterfalls than staircases, Defarge, the turnkey, and Jacques Three,
linked hand and arm, went with all the speed they could make. Here and
there, especially at first, the inundation started on them and swept
by; but when they had done descending, and were winding and climbing
up a tower, they were alone. Hemmed in here by the massive thickness
of walls and arches, the storm within the fortress and without was
only audible to them in a dull, subdued way, as if the noise out of
which they had come had almost destroyed their sense of hearing.

  The turnkey stopped at a low door, put a key in a clashing lock,
swung the door slowly open, and said, as they all bent their heads and
passed in:

  "One hundred and five, North Tower!"

  There was a small, heavily-grated, unglazed window high in the wall,
with a stone screen before it, so that the sky could be only seen by
stooping low and looking up. There was a small chimney, heavily barred
across, a few feet within. There was a heap of old feathery wood-ashes
on the hearth. There was a stool, and table, and a straw bed. There
were the four blackened walls, and a rusted iron ring in one of them.

  "Pass that torch slowly along these walls, that I may see them,"
said Defarge to the turnkey.

  The man obeyed, and Defarge followed the light closely with his
eyes.

  "Stop!- Look here, Jacques!"

  "A. M.!" croaked Jacques Three, as he read greedily.

  "Alexandre Manette," said Defarge in his ear, following the
letters with his swart forefinger, deeply engrained with gunpowder.
"And here he wrote 'a poor physician.' And it was he, without doubt,
who scratched a calendar on this stone. What is that in your hand? A
crowbar? Give it me!"

  He had still the linstock of his gun in his own hand. He made a
sudden exchange of the two instruments, and turning on the
worm-eaten stool and table, beat them to pieces in a few blows.

  "Hold the light higher!" he said, wrathfully, to the turnkey.
"Look among those fragments with care, Jacques. And see! Here is my
knife," throwing it to him; "rip open that bed, and search the
straw. Hold the light higher, you!"

  With a menacing look at the turnkey he crawled upon the hearth, and,
peering up the chimney, struck and prised at its sides with the
crowbar, and worked at the iron grating across it. In a few minutes,
some mortar and dust came dropping down, which he averted his face
to avoid; and in it, and in the old wood-ashes, and in a crevice in
the chimney into which his weapon had slipped or wrought itself, he
groped with a cautious touch.

  "Nothing in the wood, and nothing in the straw, Jacques?"

  "Nothing."

  Let us collect them together, in the middle of the cell. So! Light
them, you!

  The turnkey fired the little pile, which blazed high and hot.
Stooping again to come out at the low-arched door, they left it
burning, and retraced their way to the courtyard; seeming to recover
their sense of hearing as they came down, until they were in the
raging flood once more.

  They found it surging and tossing, in quest of Defarge himself.
Saint Antoine was clamorous to have its wine-shop keeper foremost in
the guard upon the governor who had defended the Bastille and shot the
people. Otherwise, the governor would not be marched to the Hotel de
Ville for judgment. Otherwise, the governor would escape, and the
people's blood (suddenly of some value, after many years of
worthlessness) be unavenged.

  In the howling universe of passion and contention that seemed to
encompass this grim old officer conspicuous in his grey coat and red
decoration, there was but one quite steady figure, and that was a
woman's. "See, there is my husband!" she cried, pointing him out. "See
Defarge!" She stood immovable close to the grim old officer, and
remained immovable close to him; remained immovable close to him
through the streets, as Defarge and the rest bore him along;
remained immovable close to him when he was got near his
destination, and began to be struck at from behind; remained immovable
close to him when the long-gathering rain of stabs and blows fell
heavy; was so close to him when he dropped dead under it, that,
suddenly animated, she put her foot upon his neck, and with her
cruel knife-long ready-hewed off his head.

  The hour was come, when Saint Antoine was to execute his horrible
idea of hoisting up men for lamps to show what he could be and do.
Saint Antoine's blood was up, and the blood of tyranny and
domination by the iron hand was down- down on the steps of the Hotel
de Ville where the governor's body lay- down on the sole of the shoe
of Madame Defarge where she had trodden on the body to steady it for
mutilation. "Lower the lamp yonder!" cried Saint Antoine, after
glaring round for a new means of death; "here is one of his soldiers
to be left on guard!" The swinging sentinel was posted, and the sea
rushed on.

  The sea of black and threatening waters, and of destructive
upheaving of wave against wave, whose depths were yet unfathomed and
whose forces were yet unknown. The remorseless sea of turbulently
swaying shapes, voices of vengeance, and faces hardened in the
furnaces of suffering until the touch of pity could make no mark on
them.

  But, in the ocean of faces where every fierce and furious expression
was in vivid life, there were two groups of faces- each seven in
number- so fixedly contrasting with the rest, that never did sea
roll which bore more memorable wrecks with it. Seven faces of
prisoners, suddenly released by the storm that had burst their tomb,
were carried high overhead: all scared, all lost, all wondering and
amazed, as if the Last Day were come, and those who rejoiced around
them were lost spirits. Other seven faces there were, carried
higher, seven dead faces, whose drooping eyelids and half-seen eyes
awaited the Last Day. Impassive faces, yet with a suspended- not an
abolished- expression on them; faces, rather, in a fearful pause, as
having yet to raise the dropped lids of the eyes, and bear witness
with the bloodless lips, "THOU DIDST IT!"

  Seven prisoners released, seven gory heads on pikes, the keys of the
accursed fortress of the eight strong towers, some discovered
letters and other memorials of prisoners of old time, long dead of
broken hearts, such, and such-like, the loudly echoing footsteps of
Saint Antoine escort through the Paris streets in mid-July, one
thousand seven hundred and eighty-nine. Now, Heaven defeat the fancy
of Lucie Darnay, and keep these feet far out of her life! For, they
are headlong, mad, and dangerous; and in the years so long after the
breaking of the cask at Defarge's wine-shop door, they are not
easily purified when once stained red.

  XXII

  THE SEA STILL RISES

  HAGGARD SAINT ANTOINE had had only one exultant week, in which to
soften his modicum of hard and bitter bread to such extent as he
could, with the relish of fraternal embraces and congratulations, when
Madame Defarge sat at her counter, as usual, presiding over the
customers. Madame Defarge wore no rose in her head, for the great
brotherhood of Spies had become, even in one short week, extremely
chary of trusting themselves to the saint's mercies. The lamps
across his streets had a portentously elastic swing with them.

  Madame Defarge, with her arms folded, sat in the morning light and
heat, contemplating the wine-shop and the street. In both, there
were several knots of loungers, squalid and miserable, but now with
a manifest sense of power enthroned on their distress. The raggedest
nightcap, awry on the wretchedest head, had this crooked
significance in it: "I know how hard it has grown for me, the wearer
of this, to support life in myself; but do you know how easy it has
grown for me, the wearer of this, to destroy life in you?" Every
lean bare arm, that had been without work before, had this work always
ready for it now, that it could strike. The fingers of the knitting
women were vicious, with the experience that they could tear. There
was a change in the appearance of Saint Antoine; the image had been
hammering into this for hundreds of years, and the last finishing
blows had told mightily on the expression.

  Madame Defarge sat observing it, with such suppressed approval as
was to be desired in the leader of the Saint Antoine women. One of her
sisterhood knitted beside her. The short, rather plump wife of a
starved grocer, and the mother of two children withal, this lieutenant
had already earned the complimentary name of The Vengeance.

  "Hark!" said The Vengeance. "Listen, then! Who comes?"

  As if a train of powder laid from the outermost bound of Saint
Antoine Quarter to the wine-shop door, had been suddenly fired, a
fast-spreading murmur came rushing along.

  "It is Defarge," said madame. "Silence, patriots!"

  Defarge came in breathless, pulled off a red cap he wore, and looked
around him! "Listen, everywhere!" said madame again. "Listen to him!
Defarge stood, panting, against a background of eager eyes and open
mouths, formed outside the door; all those within the wine-shop had
sprung to their feet.

  "Say then, my husband. What is it?"

  "News from the other world!"

  "How, then?" cried madame, contemptuously. "The other world?"

  "Does everybody here recall old Foulon, who told the famished people
that they might eat grass, and who died, and went to Hell?"

  "Everybody!" from all throats.

  "The news is of him. He is among us!"

  "Among us!" from the universal throat again. "And dead?"

  "Not dead! He feared us so much- and with reason- that he caused
himself to be represented as dead, and had a grand mock-funeral. But
they have found him alive, hiding in the country, and have brought him
in. I have seen him but now, on his way to the Hotel de Ville, a
prisoner. I have said that he had reason to fear us. Say all! Had he
reason?"

  Wretched old sinner of more than threescore years and ten, if he had
never known it yet, he would have known it in his heart of hearts if
he could have heard the answering cry.

  A moment of profound silence followed. Defarge and his wife looked
steadfastly at one another. The Vengeance stooped, and the jar of a
drum was heard as she moved it at her feet behind the counter.

  "Patriots!" said Defarge, in a determined voice, "are we ready?"

  Instantly Madame Defarge's knife was in her girdle; the drum was
beating in the streets, as if it and a drummer had flown together by
magic; and The Vengeance, uttering terrific shrieks, and flinging
her arms about her head like all the forty Furies at once, was tearing
from house to house, rousing the women.

  The men were terrible, in the bloody-minded anger with which they
looked from windows, caught up what arms they had, and came pouring
down into the streets; but, the women were a sight to chill the
boldest. From such household occupations as their bare poverty
yielded, from their children, from their aged and their sick crouching
on the bare ground famished and naked, they ran out with streaming
hair, urging one another, and themselves, to madness with the
wildest cries and actions. Villain Foulon taken, my sister! Old Foulon
taken, my mother! Miscreant Foulon taken, my daughter! Then, a score
of others ran into the midst of these, beating their breasts,
tearing their hair, and screaming, Foulon alive! Foulon who told the
starving people they might eat grass! Foulon who told my old father
that he might eat grass, when I had no bread to give him! Foulon who
told my baby it might suck grass, when these breasts where dry with
want! O mother of God, this Foulon! O Heaven our suffering! Hear me,
my dead baby and my withered father: I swear on my knees, on these
stones, to avenge you on Foulon! Husbands, and brothers, and young
men, Give us the blood of Foulon, Give us the head of Foulon, Give
us the heart of Foulon, Give us the body and soul of Foulon, Rend
Foulon to pieces, and dig him into the ground, that grass may grow
from him! With these cries, numbers of the women, lashed into blind
frenzy, whirled about, striking and tearing at their own friends until
they dropped into a passionate swoon, and were only saved by the men
belonging to them from being trampled under foot.

  Nevertheless, not a moment was lost; not a moment! This Foulon was
at the Hotel de Ville, and might be loosed. Never, if Saint Antoine
knew his own sufferings, insults, and wrongs! Armed men and women
flocked out of the Quarter so fast, and drew even these last dregs
after them with such a force of suction, that within a quarter of an
hour there was not a human creature in Saint Antoine's bosom but a few
old crones and the wailing children.

  No. They were all by that time choking the Hall of Examination where
this old man, ugly and wicked, was, and overflowing into the
adjacent open space and streets. The Defarges, husband and wife, The
Vengeance, and Jacques Three, were in the first press, and at no great
distance from him in the Hall.

  "See!" cried madame, pointing with her knife. "See the old villain
bound with ropes. That was well done to tie a bunch of grass upon
his back. Ha, ha! That was well done. Let him eat it now!" Madame
put her knife under her arm, and clapped her hands as at a play.

  The people immediately behind Madame Defarge, explaining the cause
of her satisfaction to those behind them, and those again explaining
to others, and those to others, the neighbouring streets resounded
with the clapping of hands. Similarly, during two or three hours of
drawl, and the winnowing of many bushels of words, Madame Defarge's
frequent expressions of impatience were taken up, with marvellous
quickness, at a distance: the more readily, because certain men who
had by some wonderful exercise of agility climbed up the external
architecture to look in from the windows, knew Madame Defarge well,
and acted as a telegraph between her and the crowd outside the
building.

  At length the sun rose so high that it struck a kindly ray as of
hope or protection, directly down upon the old prisoner's head. The
favour was too much to bear; in an instant the barrier of dust and
chaff that had stood surprisingly long, went to the winds, and Saint
Antoine had got him!

  It was known directly, to the furthest confines of the crowd.
Defarge had but sprung over a railing and a table, and folded the
miserable wretch in a deadly embrace- Madame Defarge had but
followed and turned her hand in one of the ropes with which he was
tied- The Vengeance and Jacques Three were not yet up with them, and
the men at the windows had not yet swooped into the Hall, like birds
of prey from their high perches- when the cry seemed to go up, all
over the city, "Bring him out! Bring him to the lamp!"

  Down, and up, and head foremost on the steps of the building; now,
on his knees; now, on his feet; now, on his back; dragged, and
struck at, and stifled by the bunches of grass and straw that were
thrust into his face by hundreds of hands; torn, bruised, panting,
bleeding, yet always entreating and beseeching for mercy; now full
of vehement agony of action, with a small clear space about him as the
people drew one another back that they might see; now, a log of dead
wood drawn through a forest of legs; he was hauled to the nearest
street corner where one of the fatal lamps swung, and there Madame
Defarge let him go- as a cat might have done to a mouse- and
silently and composedly looked at him while they made ready, and while
he besought her: the women passionately screeching at him all the
time, and the men sternly calling out to have him killed with grass in
his mouth. Once, he went aloft, and the rope broke, and they caught
him shrieking; twice, he went aloft, and the rope broke, and they
caught him shrieking; then, the rope was merciful, and held him, and
his head was soon upon a pike, with grass enough in the mouth for
all Saint Antoine to dance at the sight of.

  Nor was this the end of the day's bad work, for Saint Antoine so
shouted and danced his angry blood up, that it boiled again, on
hearing when the day closed in that the son-in-law of the
despatched, another of the people's enemies and insulters, was
coming into Paris under a guard five hundred strong, in cavalry alone.
Saint Antoine wrote his crimes on flaring sheets of paper, seized him-
would have torn him out of the breast of an army to bear Foulon
company- set his head and heart on pikes, and carried the three spoils
of the day, in Wolf-procession through the streets.

  Not before dark night did the men and women come back to the
children, wailing and breadless. Then, the miserable bakers' shops
were beset by long files of them, patiently waiting to buy bad
bread; and while they waited with stomachs faint and empty, they
beguiled the time by embracing one another on the triumphs of the day,
and achieving them again in gossip. Gradually, these strings of ragged
people shortened and frayed away; and then poor lights began to
shine in high windows, and slender fires were made in the streets,
at which neighbours cooked in common, afterwards supping at their
doors.

  Scanty and insufficient suppers those, and innocent of meat, as of
most other sauce to wretched bread. Yet, human fellowship infused some
nourishment into the flinty viands, and struck some sparks of
cheerfulness out of them. Fathers and mothers who had had their full
in the worst of the day, played gently with their meagre children; and
lovers, with such a world around them and before them, loved and
hoped.

  It was almost morning, when Defarge's wine-shop parted with its last
knot of customers, and Monsieur Defarge said to madame his wife, in
husky tones, while fastening the door:

  "At last it is come, my dear!"

  "Eh well!" returned madame. "Almost."

  Saint Antoine slept, the Defarges slept: even The Vengeance slept
with her starved grocer, and the drum was at rest. The drum's was
the only voice in Saint Antoine that blood and hurry had not
changed. The Vengeance, as custodian of the drum, could have wakened
him up and had the same speech out of him as before the Bastille fell,
or old Foulon was seized; not so with the hoarse tones of the men
and women in Saint Antoine's bosom.

  XXIII

  FIRE RISES

  THERE WAS a change on the village where the fountain fell, and where
the mender of roads went forth daily to hammer out of the stones on
the highway such morsels of bread as might serve for patches to hold
his poor ignorant soul and his poor reduced body together. The
prison on the crag was not so dominant as of yore; there were soldiers
to guard it, but not many; there were officers to guard the
soldiers, but not one of them knew what his men would do- beyond this:
that it would probably not be what he was ordered.

  Far and wide lay a rained country, yielding nothing but
desolation. Every green leaf, every blade of grass and blade of grain,
was as shrivelled and poor as the miserable people. Everything was
bowed down, dejected, oppressed, and broken. Habitations, fences,
domesticated animals, men, women, children, and the soil that bore
them- all worn out.

  Monseigneur (often a most worthy individual gentleman) was a
national blessing, gave a chivalrous tone to things, was a polite
example of luxurious and shining life, and a great deal more to
equal purpose; nevertheless, Monseigneur as a class had, somehow or
other, brought things to this. Strange that Creation, designed
expressly for Monseigneur, should be so soon wrung dry and squeezed
out! There must be something shortsighted in the eternal arrangements,
surely! Thus it was, however; and the last drop of blood having
been extracted from the flints, and the last screw of the rack
having been turned so often that its purchase crumbled, and it now
turned and turned with nothing to bite, Monseigneur began to run
away from a phenomenon so low and unaccountable.

  But, this was not the change on the village, and on many a village
like it. For scores of years gone by, Monseigneur had squeezed it
and wrung it, and had seldom graced it with his presence except for
the pleasures of the chase- now, found in hunting the people; now,
found in hunting the beasts, for whose preservation Monseigneur made
edifying spaces of barbarous and barren wilderness. No. The change
consisted in the appearance of strange faces of low caste, rather than
in the disappearance of the high caste, chiselled, and otherwise
beautified and beautifying features of Monseigneur.

  For, in these times, as the mender of roads worked, solitary, in the
dust, not often troubling himself to reflect that dust he was and to
dust he must return, being for the most part too much occupied in
thinking how little he had for supper and how much more he would eat
if he had it- in these times, as he raised his eyes from his lonely
labour, and viewed the prospect, he would see some rough figure
approaching on foot, the like of which was once a rarity in those
parts, but was now a frequent presence. As it advanced, the mender
of roads would discern without surprise, that it was a shaggy-haired
man, of almost barbarian aspect, tall, in wooden shoes that were
clumsy even to the eyes of a mender of roads, grim, rough, swart,
steeped in the mud and dust of many highways, dank with the marshy
moisture of many low grounds, sprinkled with the thorns and leaves and
moss of many byways through woods.

  Such a man came upon him, like a ghost, at noon in the July weather,
as he sat on his heap of stones under a bank, taking such shelter as
he could get from a shower of hail.

  The man looked at him, looked at the village in the hollow, at the
