mill, and at the prison on the crag. When he had identified these
objects in what benighted mind he had, he said, in a dialect that
was just intelligible:

  "How goes it, Jacques?"

  "All well, Jacques."

  "Touch then!"

  They joined hands, and the man sat down on the heap of stones.

  "No dinner?"

  "Nothing but supper now," said the mender of roads, with a hungry
face.

  "It is the fashion," growled the man. "I meet no dinner anywhere."

  He took out a blackened pipe, filled it, lighted it with flint and
steel, pulled at it until it was in a bright glow: then, suddenly held
it from him and dropped something into it from between his finger
and thumb, that blazed and went out in a puff of smoke.

  "Touch then." It was the turn of the mender of roads to say it
this time, after observing these operations. They again joined hands.

  "To-night?" said the mender of roads.

  "To-night," said the man, putting the pipe in his mouth.

  "Where?"

  "Here."

  He and the mender of roads sat on the heap of stones looking
silently at one another, with the hail driving in between them like
a pigmy charge of bayonets, until the sky began to clear over the
village.

  "Show me!" said the traveller then, moving to the brow of the hill.

  "See!" returned the mender of roads, with extended finger. "You go
down here, and straight through the street, and past the fountain--"

  "To the Devil with all that!" interrupted the other, rolling his eye
over the landscape. "I go through no streets and past no fountains.
Well?"

  "Well! About two leagues beyond the summit of that hill above the
village."

  "Good. When do you cease to work?"

  "At sunset."

  "Will you wake me, before departing? I have walked two nights
without resting. Let me finish my pipe, and I shall sleep like a
child. Will you wake me?"

  "Surely."

  The wayfarer smoked his pipe out, put it in his breast, slipped
off his great wooden shoes, and lay down on his back on the heap of
stones. He was fast asleep directly.

  As the road-mender plied his dusty labour, and the hail-clouds,
rolling away, revealed bright bars and streaks of sky which were
responded to by silver gleams upon the landscape, the little man
(who wore a red cap now, in place of his blue one) seemed fascinated
by the figure on the heap of stones. His eyes were so often turned
towards it, that he used his tools mechanically, and, one would have
said, to very poor account. The bronze face, the shaggy black hair and
beard, the coarse woollen red cap, the rough medley dress of home-spun
stuff and hairy skins of beasts, the powerful frame attenuated by
spare living, and the sullen and desperate compression of the lips
in sleep, inspired the mender of roads with awe. The traveller had
travelled far, and his feet were footsore, and his ankles chafed and
bleeding; his great shoes, stuffed with leaves and grass, had been
heavy to drag over the many long leagues, and his clothes were
chafed into holes, as he himself was into sores. Stooping down
beside him, the road-mender tried to get a peep at secret weapons in
his breast or where not; but, in vain, for he slept with his arms
crossed upon him, and set as resolutely as his lips. Fortified towns
with their stockades, guard-houses, gates, trenches, and
drawbridges, seemed to the mender of roads, to be so much air as
against this figure. And when he lifted his eyes from it to the
horizon and looked around, he saw in his small fancy similar
figures, stopped by no obstacle, tending to centres all over France.

  The man slept on, indifferent to showers of hail and intervals of
brightness, to sunshine on his face and shadow, to the pattering lumps
of dull ice on his body and the diamonds into which the sun changed
them, until the sun was low in the west, and the sky was glowing.
Then, the mender of roads having got his tools together and all things
ready to go down into the village, roused him.

  "Good!" said the sleeper, rising on his elbow. "Two leagues beyond
the summit of the hill?"

  "About."

  "About. Good!"

  The mender of roads went home, with the dust going on before him
according to the set of the wind, and was soon at the fountain,
squeezing himself in among the lean kine brought there to drink, and
appearing even to whisper to them in his whispering to all the
village. When the village had taken its poor supper, it did not
creep to bed, as it usually did, but came out of doors again, and
remained there. A curious contagion of whispering was upon it, and
also, when it gathered together at the fountain in the dark, another
curious contagion of looking expectantly at the sky in one direction
only. Monsieur Gabelle, chief functionary of the place, became uneasy;
went out on his house-top alone, and looked in that direction too;
glanced down from behind his chimneys at the darkening faces by the
fountain below, and sent word to the sacristan who kept the keys of
the church, that there might be need to ring the tocsin by-and-bye.

  The night deepened. The trees environing the old chateau, keeping
its solitary state apart, moved in a rising wind, as though they
threatened the pile of building massive and dark in the gloom. Up
the two terrace flights of steps the rain ran wildly, and beat at
the great door, like a swift messenger rousing those within; uneasy
rushes of wind went through the hall, among the old spears and knives,
and passed lamenting up the stairs, and shook the curtains of the
bed where the last Marquis had slept. East, West, North, and South,
through the woods, four heavy-treading, unkempt figures crushed the
high grass and cracked the branches, striding on cautiously to come in
the courtyard. Four lights broke out there, and moved away in
different directions, and all was black again.

  But, not for long. Presently, the chateau began to make itself
strangely visible by some light of its own, as though it were
growing Then, a flickering streak played behind the architecture of
the front, picking out transparent places, and showing where
balustrades, arches, and windows were. Then it soared higher, and grew
broader and brighter. Soon, from a score of the great windows,
flames burst forth, and the stone faces awakened, stared out of fire.

  A faint murmur arose about the house from the few people who were
left there, and there was a saddling of a horse and riding away. There
was spurring and splashing through the darkness, and bridle was
drawn in the space by the village fountain, and the horse in a foam
stood at Monsieur Gabelle's door. "Help, Gabelle! Help, every one!"
The tocsin rang impatiently, but other help (if that were any) there
was none. The mender of roads, and two hundred and fifty particular
friends, stood with folded arms at the fountain, looking at the pillar
of fire in the sky. "It must be forty feet high," said they, grimly;
and never moved.

  The rider from the chateau, and the horse in a foam, clattered
away through the village, and galloped up the stony steep, to the
prison on the crag. At the gate, a group of officers were looking at
the fire; removed from them, a group of soldiers. "Help, gentlemen-
officers! The chateau is on fire; valuable objects may be saved from
the flames by timely aid! Help, help!" The officers looked towards the
soldiers who looked at the fire; gave no orders; and answered, with
shrugs and biting of lips, "It must burn."

  As the rider rattled down the hill again and through the street, the
village was illuminating. The mender of roads, and the two hundred and
fifty particular friends, inspired as one man and woman by the idea of
lighting up, had darted into their houses, and were putting candles in
every dull little pane of glass. The general scarcity of everything,
occasioned candles to be borrowed in a rather peremptory manner of
Monsieur Gabelle; and in a moment of reluctance and hesitation on that
functionary's part, the mender of roads, once so submissive to
authority, had remarked that carriages were good to make bonfires
with, and that post-horses would roast.

  The chateau was left to itself to flame and burn. In the roaring and
raging of the conflagration, a red-hot wind, driving straight from the
infernal regions, seemed to be blowing the edifice away. With the
rising and failing of the blaze, the stone faces showed as if they
were in torment. When great masses of stone and timber fell, the
face with the two dints in the nose became obscured: anon struggled
out of the smoke again, as if it were the face of the cruel Marquis,
burning at the stake and contending with the fire.

  The chateau burned; the nearest trees, laid hold of by the fire,
scorched and shrivelled; trees at a distance, fired by the four fierce
figures, begirt the blazing edifice with a new forest of smoke. Molten
lead and iron boiled in the marble basin of the fountain; the water
ran dry; the extinguisher tops of the towers vanished like ice
before the heat, and trickled down into four rugged wells of flame.
Great rents and splits branched out in the solid walls, like
crystallisation; stupefied birds wheeled about and dropped into the
furnace; four fierce figures trudged away, East, West, North, and
South, along the night-enshrouded roads, guided by the beacon they had
lighted, towards their next destination. The illuminated village had
seized hold of the tocsin, and, abolishing the lawful ringer, rang for
joy.

  Not only that; but the village, light-headed with famine, fire,
and bell-ringing, and bethinking itself that Monsieur Gabelle had to
do with the collection of rent and taxes- though it was but a small
instalment of taxes, and no rent at all, that Gabelle had got in those
latter days- became impatient for an interview with him, and,
surrounding his house, summoned him to come forth for personal
conference. Whereupon, Monsieur Gabelle did heavily bar his door,
and retire to hold counsel with himself. The result of that conference
was, that Gabelle again withdrew himself to his housetop behind his
stack of chimneys; this time resolved, if his door were broken in
(he was a small Southern man of retaliative temperament), to pitch
himself head foremost over the parapet, and crush a man or two below.

  Probably, Monsieur Gabelle passed a long night up there, with the
distant chateau for fire and candle, and the beating at his door,
combined with the joy-ringing, for music; not to mention his having an
ill-omened lamp slung across the road before his posting-house gate,
which the village showed a lively inclination to displace in his
favour. A trying suspense, to be passing a whole summer night on the
brink of the black ocean, ready to take that plunge into it upon which
Monsieur Gabelle had resolved! But, the friendly dawn appearing at
last, and the rush- candles of the village guttering out, the people
happily dispersed, and Monsieur Gabelle came down bringing his life
with him for that while.

  Within a hundred miles, and in the light of other fires, there
were other functionaries less fortunate, that night and other
nights, whom the rising sun found hanging across once-peaceful
streets, where they had been born and bred; also, there were other
villagers and townspeople less fortunate than the mender of roads
and his fellows, upon whom the functionaries and soldiery turned
with success, and whom they strung up in their turn. But, the fierce
figures were steadily wending East, West, North, and South, be that as
it would; and whosoever hung, fire burned. The altitude of the gallows
that would turn to water and quench it, no functionary, by any stretch
of mathematics, was able to calculate successfully.

  XXIV

  DRAWN TO THE LOADSTONE ROCK

  IN SUCH RISINGS of fire and risings of sea- the firm earth shaken by
the rushes of an angry ocean which had now no ebb, but was always on
the flow, higher and higher, to the terror and wonder of the beholders
on the shore- three years of tempest were consumed. Three more
birthdays of little Lucie had been woven by the golden thread into the
peaceful tissue of the life of her home.

  Many a night and many a day had its inmates listened to the echoes
in the corner, with hearts that failed them when they heard the
thronging feet. For, the footsteps had become to their minds as the
footsteps of a people, tumultuous under a red flag and with their
country declared in danger, changed into wild beasts, by terrible
enchantment long persisted in.

  Monseigneur, as a class, had dissociated himself from the phenomenon
of his not being, appreciated: of his being so little wanted in
France, as to incur considerable danger of receiving his dismissal
from it, and this life together. Like the fabled rustic who raised the
Devil with infinite pains, and was so terrified at the sight of him
that he could ask the Enemy no question, but immediately fled; so,
Monseigneur, after boldly reading the Lord's Prayer backwards for a
great number of years, and performing many other potent spells for
compelling the Evil One, no sooner beheld him in his terrors than he
took to his noble heels.

  The shining Bull's Eye of the Court was gone, or it would have
been the mark for a hurricane of national bullets It had never been
a good eye to see with- had long had the mote in it of Lucifer's
pride, Sardanapalus's luxury, and a mole's blindness- but it had
dropped out and was gone. The Court, from that exclusive inner
circle to its outermost rotten ring of intrigue, corruption, and
dissimulation, was all gone together. Royalty was gone; had been
besieged in its Palace and "suspended," when the last tidings came
over.

  The August of the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-two was
come, and ninety-two was come, and Monseigneur was by this time
scattered far and wide.

  As was natural, the head-quarters and great gathering-place of
Monseigneur, in London, was Tellson's Bank. Spirits are supposed to
haunt the places where their bodies most resorted, and Monseigneur
without a guinea haunted the spot where his guineas used to be.
Moreover, it was the spot to which such French intelligence as was
most to be relied upon, came quickest. Again: Tellson's was a
munificent house, and extended great liberality to old customers who
had fallen from their high estate. Again: those nobles who had seen
the coming storm in time, and anticipating plunder or confiscation,
had made provident remittances to Tellson's, were always to be heard
of there by their needy brethren. To which it must be added that every
new-comer from France reported himself and his tidings at Tellson's,
almost as a matter of course. For such variety of reasons, Tellson's
was at that time, as to French intelligence, a kind of High
Exchange; and this was so well known to the public, and the
inquiries made there were in consequence so numerous, that Tellson's
sometimes wrote the latest news out in a line or so and posted it in
the Bank windows, for all who ran through Temple Bar to read.

  On a steaming, misty afternoon, Mr. Lorry sat at his desk, and
Charles Darnay stood leaning on it, talking with him in a low voice.
The penitential den once set apart for interviews with the House,
was now the news-Exchange, and was filled to overflowing. It was
within half an hour or so of the time of closing.

  "But, although you are the youngest man that ever lived," said
Charles Darnay, rather hesitating, "I must still suggest to you--"

  "I understand. That I am too old?" said Mr. Lorry.

  "Unsettled weather, a long journey, uncertain means of travelling, a
disorganised country, a city that may not be even safe for you."

  "My dear Charles," said Mr. Lorry, with cheerful confidence, "you
touch some of the reasons for my going: not for my staying away. It is
safe enough for me; nobody will care to interfere with an old fellow
of hard upon fourscore when there are so many people there much better
worth interfering with. As to its being a disorganised city, if it
were not a disorganised city there would be no occasion to send
somebody from our House here to our House there, who knows the city
and the business, of old, and is in Tellson's confidence. As to the
uncertain travelling, the long journey, and the winter weather, if I
were not prepared to submit myself to a few inconveniences for the
sake of Tellson's, after all these years, who ought to be?"

  "I wish I were going myself," said Charles Darnay, somewhat
restlessly, and Eke one thinking aloud.

  "Indeed! You are a pretty fellow to object and advise!" exclaimed
Mr. Lorry. "You wish you were going yourself? And you a Frenchman
born? You are a wise counsellor."

  "My dear Mr. Lorry, it is because I am a Frenchman born, that the
thought (which I did not mean to utter here, however) bas passed
through my mind often. One cannot help thinking, having had some
sympathy for the miserable people, and having abandoned something to
them," he spoke here in his former thoughtful manner, "that one
might be listened to, and might have the power to persuade to some
restraint. Only last night, after you had left us, when I was
talking to Lucie--"

  "When you were talking to Lucie," Mr. Lorry repeated. "Yes. I wonder
you are not ashamed to mention the name of Lucie! Wishing you were
going to France at this time of day!"

  "However, I am not going," said Charles Darnay, with a smile. "It is
more to the purpose that you say you are."

  "And I am, in plain reality. The truth is, my dear Charles," Mr.
Lorry glanced at the distant House, and lowered his voice, "you can
have no conception of the difficulty with which our business is
transacted, and of the peril in which our books and papers over yonder
are involved. The Lord above knows what the compromising
consequences would be to numbers of people, if some of our documents
were seized or destroyed; and they might be, at any time, you know,
for who can say that Paris is not set afire to-day, or sacked
to-morrow! Now, a judicious selection from these with the least
possible delay, and the burying of them, or otherwise getting of
them out of harm's way, is within the power (without loss of
precious time) of scarcely any one but myself, if any one. And shall I
hang back, when Tellson's knows this and says this- Tellson's, whose
bread I have eaten these sixty years- because I am a little stiff
about the joints? Why, I am a boy, sir, to half a dozen old codgers
here!"

  "How I admire the gallantry of your youthful spirit, Mr. Lorry."

  "Tut! Nonsense, sir!- And, my dear Charles," said Mr. Lorry,
glancing at the House again, "you are to remember, that getting things
out of Paris at this present time, no matter what things, is next to
an impossibility. Papers and precious matters were this very day
brought to us here (I speak in strict confidence; it is not
business-like to whisper it, even to you), by the strangest bearers
you can imagine, every one of whom had his head hanging on by a single
hair as he passed the Barriers. At another time, our parcels would
come and go, as easily as in business-like Old England; but now,
everything is stopped."

  "And do you really go to-night?"

  "I really go to-night, for the case has become too pressing to admit
of delay."

  "And do you take no one with you?"

  "All sorts of people have been proposed to me, but I will have
nothing to say to any of them. I intend to take Jerry. Jerry has
been my bodyguard on Sunday nights for a long time past and I am
used to him. Nobody will suspect Jerry of being anything but an
English bull-dog, or of having any design in his head but to fly at
anybody who touches his master."

  "I must say again that I heartily admire your gallantry and
youthfulness."

  "I must say again, nonsense, nonsense! When I have executed this
little commission, I shall, perhaps, accept Tellson's proposal to
retire and live at my ease. Time enough, then, to think about
growing old."

  This dialogue had taken place at Mr. Lorry's usual desk, with
Monseigneur swarming within a yard or two of it, boastful of what he
would do to avenge himself on the rascal-people before long. It was
too much the way of Monseigneur under his reverses as a refugee, and
it was much too much the way of native British orthodoxy, to talk of
this terrible Revolution as if it were the only harvest ever known
under the skies that had not been sown- as if nothing had ever been
done, or omitted to be done, that had led to it- as if observers of
the wretched millions in France, and of the misused and perverted
resources that should have made them prosperous, had not seen it
inevitably coming, years before, and had not in plain words recorded
what they saw. Such vapouring, combined with the extravagant plots
of Monseigneur for the restoration of a state of things that had
utterly exhausted itself, and worn out Heaven and earth as well as
itself, was hard to be endured without some remonstrance by any sane
man who knew the truth. And it was such vapouring all about his
ears, like a troublesome confusion of blood in his own head, added
to a latent uneasiness in his mind, which had already made Charles
Darnay restless, and which still kept him so.

  Among the talkers, was Stryver, of the King's Bench Bar, far on
his way to state promotion, and, therefore, loud on the theme:
broaching to Monseigneur, his devices for blowing the people up and
exterminating them from the face of the earth, and doing without them:
and for accomplishing many similar objects akin in their nature to the
abolition of eagles by sprinkling salt on the tails of the race.
Him, Darnay heard with a particular feeling of objection; and Darnay
stood divided between going away that he might hear no more, and
remaining to interpose his word, when the thing that was to be, went
on to shape itself out.

  The House approached Mr. Lorry, and laying a soiled and unopened
letter before him, asked if he had yet discovered any traces of the
person to whom it was addressed? The House laid the letter down so
close to Darnay that he saw the direction- the more quickly because it
was his own right name. The address, turned into English, ran:

  "Very pressing. To Monsieur heretofore the Marquis St. Evremonde, of
France. Confided to the cares of Messrs. Tellson and Co., Bankers,
London, England."

  On the marriage morning, Doctor Manette had made it his one urgent
and express request to Charles Darnay, that the secret of this name
should be- unless he, the Doctor, dissolved the obligation- kept
inviolate between them. Nobody else knew it to be his name; his own
wife had no suspicion of the fact; Mr. Lorry could have none.

  "No," said Mr. Lorry, in reply to the House; "I have referred it,
I think, to everybody now here, and no one can tell me where this
gentleman is to be found."

  The hands of the clock verging upon the hour of closing the Bank,
there was a general set of the current of talkers past Mr. Lorry's
desk. He held the letter out inquiringly; and Monseigneur looked at
it, in the person of this plotting and indignant refugee; and
Monseigneur looked at it in the person of that plotting and
indignant refugee; and This, That, and The Other, all had something
disparaging to say, in French or in English, concerning the Marquis
who was not to be found.

  "Nephew, I believe- but in any case degenerate successor- of the
polished Marquis who was murdered," said one. "Happy to say, I never
knew him."

  "A craven who abandoned his post," said another- this Monseigneur
had been got out of Paris, legs uppermost and half suffocated, in a
load of hay- "some years ago."

  "Infected with the new doctrines," said a third, eyeing the
direction through his glass in passing; "set himself in opposition
to the last Marquis, abandoned the estates when he inherited them, and
left them to the ruffian herd. They will recompense him now, I hope,
as he deserves."

  "Hey?" cried the blatant Stryver. "Did he though? Is that the sort
of fellow? Let us look at his infamous name. D-n the fellow!"

  Darnay, unable to restrain himself any longer, touched Mr. Stryver
on the shoulder, and said:

  "I know the fellow."

  "Do you, by Jupiter?" said Stryver. "I am sorry for it."

  "Why, Mr. Darnay? D'ye hear what he did? Don't ask, why, in these
times."

  "But I do ask why?"

  "Then I tell you again, Mr. Darnay, I am sorry for it. I am sorry to
bear you putting any such extraordinary questions. Here is a fellow,
who, infected by the most pestilent and blasphemous code of devilry
that ever was known, abandoned his property to the vilest scum of
the earth that ever did murder by wholesale, and you ask me why I am
sorry that a man who instructs youth knows him? Well, but I'll
answer you. I am sorry because I believe there is contamination in
such a scoundrel. That's why."

  Mindful of the secret, Darnay with great difficulty checked himself,
and said: "You may not understand the gentleman."

  "I understand how to put you in a corner, Mr. Darnay," said Bully
Stryver, "and I'll do it. If this fellow is a gentleman, I don't
understand him. You may tell him so, with my compliments. You may also
tell him, from me, that after abandoning his worldly goods and
position to this butcherly mob, I wonder he is not at the head of
them. But, no, gentlemen," said Stryver, looking all round, and
snapping his fingers, "I know something of human nature, and I tell
you that you'll never find a fellow like this fellow, trusting himself
to the mercies of such precious proteges. No, gentlemen; he'll
always show 'em a clean pair of heels very early in the scuffle, and
sneak away."

  With those words, and a final snap of his fingers, Mr. Stryver
shouldered himself into Fleet-street, amidst the general approbation
of his hearers. Mr. Lorry and Charles Darnay were left alone at the
desk, in the general departure from the Bank.

  "Will you take charge of the letter?" said Mr. Lorry. "You know
where to deliver it?"

  "I do."

  "Will you undertake to explain, that we suppose it to have been
addressed here, on the chance of our knowing where to forward it,
and that it has been here some time?"

  "I will do so. Do you start for Paris from here?"

  "From here, at eight."

  "I will come back, to see you off."

  Very ill at ease with himself, and with Stryver and most other
men, Darnay made the best of his way into the quiet of the Temple,
opened the letter, and read it. These were its contents:

                               "Prison of the Abbaye, Paris.

                                      "June 21, 1792.

  "MONSIEUR HERETOFORE THE MARQUIS.

  "After having long been in danger of my life at the hands of the
village, I have been seized, with great violence and indignity, and
brought a long journey on foot to Paris. On the road I have suffered a
great deal. Nor is that all; my house has been destroyed- razed to the
ground.

  "The crime for which I am imprisoned, Monsieur heretofore the
Marquis, and for which I shall be summoned before the tribunal, and
shall lose my life (without your so generous help), is, they tell
me, treason against the majesty of the people, in that I have acted
against them for an emigrant. It is in vain I represent that I have
acted for them, and not against, according to your commands. It is
in vain I represent that, before the sequestration of emigrant
property, I had remitted the imposts they had ceased to pay; that I
had collected no rent; that I had had recourse to no process. The only
response is, that I have acted for an emigrant, and where is that
emigrant?

  "Ah! most gracious Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, where is that
emigrant? I cry in my sleep where is he? I demand of Heaven, will he
not come to deliver me? No answer. Ah Monsieur heretofore the Marquis,
I send my desolate cry across the sea, hoping it may perhaps reach
your ears through the great bank of Tilson known at Paris!

  "For the love of Heaven, of justice, of generosity, of the honour of
your noble name, I supplicate you, Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, to
succour and release me. My fault is, that I have been true to you.
Oh Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, I pray you be you true to me!

  "From this prison here of horror, whence I every hour tend nearer
and nearer to destruction, I send you, Monsieur heretofore the
Marquis, the assurance of my dolorous and unhappy service.

                                     "Your afflicted,

                                                 "GABELLE."

  The latent uneasiness in Darnay's mind was roused to vigourous
life by this letter. The peril of an old servant and a good one, whose
only crime was fidelity to himself and his family, stared him so
reproachfully in the face, that, as he walked to and fro in the Temple
considering what to do, he almost hid his face from the passers-by.

  He knew very well, that in his horror of the deed which had
culminated the bad deeds and bad reputation of the old family house,
in his resentful suspicions of his uncle, and in the aversion with
which his conscience regarded the crumbling fabric that he was
supposed to uphold, he had acted imperfectly. He knew very well,
that in his love for Lucie, his renunciation of his social place,
though by no means new to his own mind, had been hurried and
incomplete. He knew that he ought to have systematically worked it out
and supervised it, and that he had meant to do it, and that it had
never been done.

  The happiness of his own chosen English home, the necessity of being
always actively employed, the swift changes and troubles of the time
which had followed on one another so fast, that the events of this
week annihilated the immature plans of last week, and the events of
the week following made all new again; he knew very well, that to
the force of these circumstances he had yielded:- not without
disquiet, but still without continuous and accumulating resistance.
That he had watched the times for a time of action, and that they
had shifted and struggled until the time had gone by, and the nobility
were trooping from France by every highway and byway, and their
property was in course of confiscation and destruction, and their very
names were blotting out, was as well known to himself as it could be
to any new authority in France that might impeach him for it.

  But, he had oppressed no man, he had imprisoned no man; he was so
far from having harshly exacted payment of his dues, that he had
relinquished them of his own will, thrown himself on a world with no
favour in it, won his own private place there, and earned his own
bread. Monsieur Gabelle had held the impoverished and involved
estate on written instructions, to spare the people, to give them what
little there was to give- such fuel as the heavy creditors would let
them have in the winter, and such produce as could be saved from the
same grip in the summer- and no doubt he had put the fact in plea
and proof, for his own safety, so that it could not but appear now.

  This favoured the desperate resolution Charles Darnay had begun to
make, that he would go to Paris.

  Yes. Like the mariner in the old story, the winds and streams had
driven him within the influence of the Loadstone Rock, and it was
drawing him to itself, and he must go. Everything that arose before
his mind drifted him on, faster and faster, more and more steadily, to
the terrible attraction. His latent uneasiness had been, that bad aims
were being worked out in his own unhappy land by bad instruments,
and that he who could not fail to know that he was better than they,
was not there, trying to do something to stay bloodshed, and assert
the claims of mercy and humanity. With this uneasiness half stifled,
and half reproaching him, be had been brought to the pointed
comparison of himself with the brave old gentleman in whom duty was so
strong; upon that comparison (injurious to himself) had instantly
followed the sneers of Monseigneur, which had stung him bitterly,
and those of Stryver, which above all were coarse and galling, for old
reasons. Upon those, had followed Gabelle's letter: the appeal of an
innocent prisoner, in danger of death, to his justice, honour, and
good name.

  His resolution was made. He must go to Paris.

  Yes. The Loadstone Rock was drawing him, and he must sail on,
until he struck. He knew of no rock; he saw hardly any danger. The
intention with which he had done what he had done, even although he
had left it incomplete, presented it before him in an aspect that
would be gratefully acknowledged in France on his presenting himself
to assert it. Then, that glorious vision of doing good, which is so
often the sanguine mirage of so many good minds, arose before him, and
he even saw himself in the illusion with some influence to guide
this raging Revolution that was running so fearfully wild.

  As he walked to and fro with his resolution made, he considered that
neither Lucie nor her father must know of it until he was gone.
Lucie should be spared the pain of separation; and her father,
always reluctant to turn his thoughts towards the dangerous ground
of old, should come to the knowledge of the step, as a step taken, and
not in the balance of suspense and doubt. How much of the
incompleteness of his situation was referable to her father, through
the painful anxiety to avoid reviving old associations of France in
his mind, he did not discuss with himself. But, that circumstance too,
had had its influence in his course.

  He walked to and fro, with thoughts very busy, until it was time
to return to Tellson's and take leave of Mr. Lorry. As soon as he
arrived in Paris he would present himself to this old friend, but he
must say nothing of his intention now.

  A carriage with post-horses was ready at the Bank door, and Jerry
was booted and equipped.

  "I have delivered that letter," said Charles Darnay to Mr. Lorry. "I
would not consent to your being charged with any written answer, but
perhaps you will take a verbal one?"

  "That I will, and readily," said Mr. Lorry, "if it is not
dangerous."

  "Not at all. Though it is to a prisoner in the Abbaye."

  "What is his name?" said Mr. Lorry, with his open pocket-book in his
hand.

  "Gabelle."

  "Gabelle. And what is the message to the unfortunate Gabelle in
prison?"

  "Simply, 'that he has received the letter, and will come.'"

  "Any time mentioned?"

  "He will start upon his journey to-morrow night."

  "Any person mentioned?"

  "No."

  He helped Mr. Lorry to wrap himself in a number of coats and cloaks,
and went out with him from the warm atmosphere of the old Bank, into
the misty air of Fleet-street. "My love to Lucie, and to little
Lucie," said Mr. Lorry at parting, "and take precious care of them
till I come back." Charles Darnay shook his head and doubtfully
smiled, as the carriage rolled away.

  That night- it was the fourteenth of August- he sat up late, and
wrote two fervent letters; one was to Lucie, explaining the strong
obligation he was under to go to Paris, and showing her, at length,
the reasons that he had, for feeling confident that he could become
involved in no personal danger there; the other was to the Doctor,
confiding Lucie and their dear child to his care, and dwelling on
the same topics with the strongest assurances. To both, he wrote
that he would despatch letters in proof of his safety, immediately
after his arrival.

  It was a hard day, that day of being among them, with the first
reservation of their joint lives on his mind. It was a hard matter
to preserve the innocent deceit of which they were profoundly
unsuspicious. But, an affectionate glance at his wife, so happy and
busy, made him resolute not to tell her what impended (he had been
half moved to do it, so strange it was to him to act in anything
without her quiet aid), and the day passed quickly. Early in the
evening he embraced her, and her scarcely less dear namesake,
pretending that he would return by-and-bye (an imaginary engagement
took him out, and he had secreted a valise of clothes ready), and so
he emerged into the heavy mist of the heavy streets, with a heavier
heart.

  The unseen force was drawing him fast to itself, now, and all the
tides and winds were setting straight and strong towards it. He left
his two letters with a trusty porter, to be delivered half an hour
before midnight, and no sooner; took horse for Dover; and began his
journey. "For the love of Heaven, of justice, of generosity, of the
honour of your noble name!" was the poor prisoner's cry with which
he strengthened his sinking heart, as he left all that was dear on
earth behind him, and floated away for the Loadstone Rock.

                 THE END OF THE SECOND BOOK.

                                 BOOK THE THIRD

                              THE TRACK OF A STORM

  I

  IN SECRET

  THE TRAVELLER fared slowly on his way, who fared towards Paris
from England in the autumn of the year one thousand seven hundred
and ninety-two. More than enough of bad roads, bad equipages, and
bad horses, he would have encountered to delay him, though the
fallen and unfortunate King of France had been upon his throne in
all his glory; but, the changed times were fraught with other
obstacles than these. Every town-gate and village taxing-house had its
band of citizen-patriots, with their national muskets in a most
explosive state of readiness, who stopped all comers and goers,
cross-questioned them, inspected their papers, looked for their
names in lists of their own, turned them back, or sent them on, or
stopped them and laid them in hold, as their capricious judgment or
fancy deemed best for the dawning Republic One and Indivisible, of
Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death.

  A very few French leagues of his journey were accomplished, when
Charles Darnay began to perceive that for him along these country
roads there was no hope of return until he should have been declared a
good citizen at Paris. Whatever might befall now, he must on to his
journey's end. Not a mean village closed upon him, not a common
barrier dropped across the road behind him, but he knew it to be
another iron door in the series that was barred between him and
England. The universal watchfulness so encompassed him, that if he had
been taken in a net, or were being forwarded to his destination in a
cage, he could not have felt his freedom more completely gone.

  This universal watchfulness not only stopped him on the highway
twenty times in a stage, but retarded his progress twenty times in a
day, by riding after him and taking him back, riding before him and
stopping him by anticipation, riding with him and keeping him in
charge. He had been days upon his journey in France alone, when he
went to bed tired out, in a little town on the high road, still a long
way from Paris.

  Nothing but the production of the afflicted Gabelle's letter from
his prison of the Abbaye would have got him on so far. His
difficulty at the guard-house in this small place had been such,
that he felt his journey to have come to a crisis. And he was,
therefore, as little surprised as a man could be, to find himself
awakened at the small inn to which he had been remitted until morning,
in the middle of the night.

  Awakened by a timid local functionary and three armed patriots in
rough red caps and with pipes in their mouths, who sat down on the
bed.

  "Emigrant," said the functionary, "I am going to send you on to
Paris, under an escort."

  "Citizen, I desire nothing more than to get to Paris, though I could
dispense with the escort."

  "Silence!" growled a red-cap, striking at the coverlet with the
butt-end of his musket. "Peace, aristocrat!"

  "It is as the good patriot says," observed the timid functionary.
"You are an aristocrat, and must have an escort- and must pay for it."

  "I have no choice," said Charles Darnay.

  "Choice! Listen to him!" cried the same scowling red-cap. "As if
it was not a favour to be protected from the lamp-iron!"

  "It is always as the good patriot says," observed the functionary.
"Rise and dress yourself, emigrant."

  Darnay complied, and was taken back to the guard-house, where
other patriots in rough red caps were smoking, drinking, and sleeping,
by a watch-fire. Here he paid a heavy price for his escort, and
hence he started with it on the wet, wet roads at three o'clock in the
morning.

  The escort were two mounted patriots in red caps and tri-coloured
cockades, armed with national muskets and sabres, who rode one on
either side of him.

  The escorted governed his own horse, but a loose line was attached
to his bridle, the end of which one of the patriots kept girded
round his wrist. In this state they set forth with the sharp rain
driving in their faces: clattering at a heavy dragoon trot over the
uneven town pavement, and out upon the mire-deep roads. In this
state they traversed without change, except of horses and pace, all
the mire-deep leagues that lay between them and the capital.

  They travelled in the night, halting an hour or two after
daybreak, and lying by until the twilight fell. The escort were so
wretchedly clothed, that they twisted straw round their bare legs, and
thatched their ragged shoulders to keep the wet off. Apart from the
personal discomfort of being so attended, and apart from such
considerations of present danger as arose from one of the patriots
being chronically drunk, and carrying his musket very recklessly,
Charles Darnay did not allow the restraint that was laid upon him to
awaken any serious fears in his breast; for, be reasoned with
himself that it could have no reference to the merits of an individual
case that was not yet stated, and of representations, confirmable by
the prisoner in the Abbaye, that were not yet made.

  But when they came to the town of Beauvais- which they did at
eventide, when the streets were filled with people- he could not
conceal from himself that the aspect of affairs was very alarming.
An ominous crowd gathered to see him dismount of the posting-yard, and
many voices called out loudly, "Down with the emigrant!"

  He stopped in the act of swinging himself out of his saddle, and,
resuming it as his safest place, said:

  "Emigrant, my friends! Do you not see me here, in France, of my
own will?"

  "You are a cursed emigrant," cried a farrier, making at him in a
furious manner through the press, hammer in hand; "and you are a
cursed aristocrat!"

  The postmaster interposed himself between this man and the rider's
bridle (at which he was evidently making), and soothingly said, "Let
him be; let him be! He will be judged at Paris."

  "Judged!" repeated the farrier, swinging his hammer. "Ay! and
condemned as a traitor." At this the crowd roared approval.

  Checking the postmaster, who was for turning his horse's head to the
yard (the drunken patriot sat composedly in his saddle looking on,
with the line round his wrist), Darnay said, as soon as he could
make his voice heard:

  "Friends, you deceive yourselves, or you are deceived. I am not a
traitor."

  "He lies!" cried the smith. "He is a traitor since the decree. His
life is forfeit to the people. His cursed life is not his own!"

  At the instant when Darnay saw a rush in the eyes of the crowd,
which another instant would have brought upon him, the postmaster
turned his horse into the yard, the escort rode in close upon his
horse's flanks, and the postmaster shut and barred the crazy double
gates. The farrier struck a blow upon them with his hammer, and the
crowd groaned; but, no more was done.

  "What is this decree that the smith spoke of?" Darnay asked the
postmaster, when he had thanked him, and stood beside him in the yard.
"Truly, a decree for selling the property of emigrants."

  "When passed?"

  "On the fourteenth."

  "The day I left England!"

  "Everybody says it is but one of several, and that there will be
others- if there are not already- banishing all emigrants, and
condemning all to death who return. That is what he meant when he said
your life was not your own."

  "But there are no such decrees yet?"

  "What do I know!" said the postmaster, shrugging his shoulders;
"there may be, or there will be. It is all the same. What would you
have?"

  They rested on some straw in a loft until the middle of the night,
and then rode forward again when all the town was asleep. Among the
many wild changes observable on familiar things which made this wild
ride unreal, not the least was the seeming rarity of sleep. After long
and lonely spurring over dreary roads, they would come to a cluster of
poor cottages, not steeped in darkness, but all glittering with
lights, and would find the people, in a ghostly manner in the dead
of the night, circling hand in hand round a shrivelled tree of
Liberty, or all drawn up together singing a Liberty song. Happily,
however, there was sleep in Beauvais that night to help them out of it
and they passed on once more into solitude and loneliness: jingling
through the untimely cold and wet, among impoverished fields that
had yielded no fruits of the earth that year, diversified by the
blackened remains of burnt houses, and by the sudden emergence from
ambuscade, and sharp reining up across their way, of patriot patrols
on the watch on all the roads.

  Daylight at last found them before the wall of Paris. The barrier
was closed and strongly guarded when they rode up to it.

  "Where are the papers of this prisoner?" demanded a resolute-looking
man in authority, who was summoned out by the guard.

  Naturally struck by the disagreeable word, Charles Darnay
requested the speaker to take notice that he was a free traveller
and French citizen, in charge of an escort which the disturbed state
of the country had imposed upon him, and which he had paid for.

  "Where," repeated the same personage, without taking any heed of him
whatever, "are the papers of this prisoner?"

  The drunken patriot had them in his cap, and produced them.
Casting his eyes over Gabelle's letter, the same personage in
authority showed some disorder and surprise, and looked at Darnay with
a close attention.

  He left escort and escorted without saying a word, however, and went
into the guard-room; meanwhile, they sat upon their horses outside the
gate. Looking about him while in this state of suspense, Charles
Darnay observed that the gate was held by a mixed guard of soldiers
and patriots, the latter far outnumbering the former; and that while
ingress into the city for peasants' carts bringing in supplies, and
for similar traffic and traffickers, was easy enough, egress, even for
the homeliest people, was very difficult. A numerous medley of men and
women, not to mention beasts and vehicles of various sorts, was
waiting to issue forth; but, the previous identification was so
strict, that they filtered through the barrier very slowly. Some of
these people knew their turn for examination to be so far off, that
they lay down on the ground to sleep or smoke, while others talked
together, or loitered about. The red cap and tricolour cockade were
universal, both among men and women.

  When he had sat in his saddle some half-hour, taking note of these
things, Darnay found himself confronted by the same man in
authority, who directed the guard to open the barrier. Then he
delivered to the escort, drunk and sober, a receipt for the
escorted, and requested him to dismount. He did so, and the two
patriots, leading his tired horse, turned and rode away without
entering the city.

  He accompanied his conductor into a guard-room, smelling of common
wine and tobacco, where certain soldiers and patriots, asleep and
awake, drunk and sober, and in various neutral states between sleeping
and waking, drunkenness and sobriety, were standing and lying about.
The light in the guard-house, half derived from the waning oil-lamps
of the night, and half from the overcast day, was in a correspondingly
uncertain condition. Some registers were lying open on a desk, and
an officer of a coarse, dark aspect, presided over these.

  "Citizen Defarge," said he to Darnay's conductor, as he took a
slip of paper to write on. "Is this the emigrant Evremonde?"

  "This is the man."

  "Your age, Evremonde?"

  "Thirty-seven."

  "Married, Evremonde?"

  "Yes."

  "Where married?"

  "In England."

  "Without doubt. Where is your wife, Evremonde?"

  "In England."

  "Without doubt. Your are consigned, Evremonde, to the prison of La
Force."

  "Just Heaven!" exclaimed Darnay. "Under what law, and for what
offence?"

  The officer looked up from his slip of paper for a moment.

  "We have new laws, Evremonde, and new offences, since you were
here." He said it with a hard smile, and went on writing.

  "I entreat you to observe that I have come here voluntarily, in
response to that written appeal of a fellow-countryman which lies
before you. I demand no more than the opportunity to do so without
delay. Is not that my right?"

  "Emigrants have no rights, Evremonde," was the stolid reply. The
officer wrote until he had finished, read over to himself what he
had written, sanded it, and handed it to Defarge, with the words "In
secret."

  Defarge motioned with the paper to the prisoner that he must
accompany him. The prisoner obeyed, and a guard of two armed
patriots attended them.

  "Is it you," said Defarge, in a low voice, as they went down the
guardhouse steps and turned into Paris, "who married the daughter of
Doctor Manette, once a prisoner in the Bastille that is no more?"

  "Yes," replied Darnay, looking at him with surprise.

  "My name is Defarge, and I keep a wine-shop in the Quarter Saint
Antoine. Possibly you have heard of me."

  "My wife came to your house to reclaim her father? Yes!"

  The word "wife" seemed to serve as a gloomy reminder to Defarge,
to say with sudden impatience, "In the name of that sharp female
newlyborn, and called La Guillotine, why did you come to France?"

  "You heard me say why, a minute ago. Do you not believe it is the
truth?"

  "A bad truth for you," said Defarge, speaking with knitted brows,
and looking straight before him.

  "Indeed I am lost here. All here is so unprecedented, so changed, so
sudden and unfair, that I am absolutely lost. Will you render me a
little help?"

  "None." Defarge spoke, always looking straight before him.

  "Will you answer me a single question?"

  "Perhaps. According to its nature. You can say what it is."

 "In this prison that I am going to so unjustly, shall I have some
free communication with the world outside?"

  "You will see."

  "I am not to be buried there, prejudged, and without any means of
presenting my case?"

  "You will see. But, what then? Other people have been similarly
buried in worse prisons, before now."

  "But never by me, Citizen Defarge."

  Defarge glanced darkly at him for answer, and walked on in a
steady and set silence. The deeper he sank into this silence, the
fainter hope there was- or so Darnay thought- of his softening in
any slight degree. He, therefore, made haste to say:

  "It is of the utmost importance to me (you know, Citizen, even
better than I, of how much importance), that I should be able to
communicate to Mr. Lorry of Tellson's Bank, an English gentleman who
is now in Paris, the simple fact, without comment, that I have been
thrown into the prison of La Force. Will you cause that to be done for
me?"

  "I will do," Defarge doggedly rejoined, "nothing for you. My duty is
to my country and the People. I am the sworn servant of both,
against you. I will do nothing for you."

  Charles Darnay felt it hopeless to entreat him further, and his
pride was touched besides. As they walked on in silnce, he could not
but see how used the people were to the spectacle of prisoners passing
along the streets. The very children scarcely noticed him. A few
passers turned their heads, and a few shook their fingers at him as an
aristocrat; otherwise, that a man in good clothes should be going to
prison, was no more remarkable than that a labourer in working clothes
should be going to work. In one narrow, dark, and dirty street through
which they passed, an excited orator, mounted on a stool, was
addressing an excited audience on the crimes against the people, of
the king and the royal family. The few words that he caught from
this man's lips, first made it known to Charles Darnay that the king
was in prison, and that the foreign ambassadors had one and all left
Paris. On the road (except at Beauvais) he had heard absolutely
nothing. The escort and the universal watchfulness had completely
isolated him.

  That he had fallen among far greater dangers than those which had
developed themselves when he left England, he of course knew now. That
perils had thickened about him fast, and might thicken faster and
faster yet, he of course knew now. He could not but admit to himself
that he might not have made this journey, if he could have foreseen
the events of a few days. And yet his misgivings were not so dark
as, imagined by the light of this later time, they would appear.
Troubled as the future was, it was the unknown future, and in its
obscurity there was ignorant hope. The horrible massacre, days and
nights long, which, within a few rounds of the clock, was to set a
great mark of blood upon the blessed garnering time of harvest, was as
far out of his knowledge as if it had been a hundred thousand years
away. The "sharp female newly-born, and called La Guillotine," was
hardly known to him, or to the generality of people, by name. The
frightful deeds that were to be soon done, were probably unimagined at
that time in the brains of the doers. How could they have a place in
the shadowy conceptions of a gentle mind?

  Of unjust treatment in detention and hardship, and in cruel
separation from his wife and child, he foreshadowed the likelihood, or
the certainty; but, beyond this, he dreaded nothing distinctly. With
this on his mind, which was enough to carry into a dreary prison
courtyard, he arrived at the prison of La Force.

  A man with a bloated face opened the strong wicket, to whom
Defarge presented "The Emigrant Evremonde."

  "What the Devil! How many more of them!" exclaimed the man with
the bloated face.

  Defarge took his receipt without noticing the exclamation, and
withdrew, with his two fellow-patriots.

  "What the Devil, I say again!" exclaimed the gaoler, left with his
wife. "How many more!"

  The gaoler's wife, being provided with no answer to the question,
merely replied, "One must have patience, my dear!" Three turnkeys
who entered responsive to a bell she rang, echoed the sentiment, and
one added, "For the love of Liberty;" which sounded in that place like
an inappropriate conclusion.

  The prison of La Force was a gloomy prison, dark and filthy, and
with a horrible smell of foul sleep in it. Extraordinary how soon
the noisome flavour of imprisoned sleep, becomes manifest in all
such places that are ill cared for!

  "In secret, too," grumbled the gaoler, looking at the written paper.
"As if I was not already full to bursting!"

  He stuck the paper on a file, in an ill-humour, and Charles Darnay
awaited his further pleasure for half an hour: sometimes, pacing to
and fro in the strong arched room: sometimes, resting on a stone seat:
in either case detained to be imprinted on the memory of the chief and
his subordinates.

  "Come!" said the chief, at length taking up his keys, "come with me,
emigrant."

  Through the dismal prison twilight, his new charge accompanied him
by corridor and staircase, many doors clanging and locking behind
them, until they came into a large, low, vaulted chamber, crowded with
prisoners of both sexes. The women were seated at a long table,
reading and writing, knitting, sewing, and embroidering; the men
were for the most part standing behind their chairs, or lingering up
and down the room.

  In the instinctive association of prisoners with shameful crime
and disgrace, the new-comer recoiled from this company. But the
crowning unreality of his long unreal ride, was, their all at once
rising to receive him, with every refinement of manner known to the
time, and with all the engaging graces and courtesies of life.

  So strangely clouded were these refinements by the prison manners
and gloom, so spectral did they become in the inappropriate squalor
and misery through which they were seen, that Charles Darnay seemed to
stand in a company of the dead. Ghosts all! The ghost of beauty, the
ghost of stateliness, the ghost of elegance, the ghost of pride, the
ghost of frivolity, the ghost of wit, the ghost of youth, the ghost of
age, all waiting their dismissal from the desolate shore, all
turning on him eyes that were changed by the death they had died in
coming there.

  It struck him motionless. The gaoler standing at his side, and the
other gaolers moving about, who would have been well enough as to
appearance in the ordinary exercise of their functions, looked so
extravagantly coarse contrasted with sorrowing mothers and blooming
daughters who were there- with the apparitions of the coquette, the
young beauty, and the mature woman delicately bred- that the inversion
of all experience and likelihood which the scene of shadows presented,
was heightened to its utmost. Surely, ghosts all. Surely, the long
unreal ride some progress of disease that had brought him to these
gloomy shades!

  "In the name of the assembled companions in misfortune," said a
gentleman of courtly appearance and address, coming forward, "I have
the honour of giving you welcome to La Force, and of condoling with
you on the calamity that has brought you among us. May it soon
terminate happily! It would be an impertinence elsewhere, but it is
not so here, to ask your name and condition?"

  Charles Darnay roused himself, and gave the required information, in
words as suitable as he could find.

  "But I hope," said the gentleman, following the chief gaoler with
his eyes, who moved across the room, "that you are not in secret?"

  "I do not understand the meaning of the term, but I have heard
them say so."

  "Ah, what a pity! We so much regret it! But take courage; several
members of our society have been in secret, at first, and it has
lasted but a short time." Then he added, raising his voice, "I
grieve to inform the society- in secret."

  There was a murmur of commiseration as Charles Darnay crossed the
room to a grated door where the gaoler awaited him, and many voices-
among which, the soft and compassionate voices of women were
conspicuous- gave him good wishes and encouragement. He turned at
the grated door, to render the thanks of his heart; it closed under
the gaoler's hand; and the apparitions vanished from his sight for
ever.

  The wicket opened on a stone staircase, leading upward. When they
had ascended forty steps (the prisoner of half an hour already counted
them), the gaoler opened a low black door, and they passed into a
solitary cell. It struck cold and damp, but was not dark.

  "Yours," said the gaoler.

  "Why am I confined alone?"

  "How do I know!"

  "I can buy pen, ink, and paper?"

  "Such are not my orders. You will be visited, and can ask then. At
present, you may buy your food, and nothing more."

  There were in the cell, a chair, a table, and a straw mattress. As
the gaoler made a general inspection of these objects, and of the four
walls, before going out, a wandering fancy wandered through the mind
of the prisoner leaning against the wall opposite to him, that this
gaoler was so unwholesomely bloated, both in face and person, as to
look like a man who had been drowned and filled with water. When the
gaoler was gone, he thought in the same wandering way, "Now am I left,
as if I were dead." Stopping then, to look down at the mattress, he
turned from it with a sick feeling, and thought, "And here in these
crawling creatures is the first condition of the body after death."

 "Five paces by four and a half, five paces by four and a half, five
paces by four and a half." The prisoner walked to and fro in his cell,
counting its measurement, and the roar of the city arose like
muffled drums with a wild swell of voices added to them. "He made
shoes, he made shoes, he made shoes." The prisoner counted the
measurement again, and paced faster, to draw his mind with him from
that latter repetition. "The ghosts that vanished when the wicket
closed. There was one among them, the appearance of a lady dressed
in black, who was leaning in the embrasure of a window, and she had
a light shining upon her golden hair, and she looked like * * * *
Let us ride on again, for God's sake, through the illuminated villages
with the people all awake! * * * * He made shoes, he made shoes, he
made shoes. * * * * Five paces by four and a half." With such scraps
tossing and rolling upward from the depths of his mind, the prisoner
walked faster and faster, obstinately counting and counting; and the
roar of the city changed to this extent- that it still rolled in
like muffled drums, but with the wall of voices that he knew, in the
swell that rose above them.

  II

  THE GRINDSTONE

  TELLSON'S BANK, established in the Saint Germain Quarter of Paris,
was in a wing of a large house, approached by a courtyard and shut off
from the street by a high wall and a strong gate. The house belonged
to a great nobleman who had lived in it until he made a flight from
the troubles, in his own cook's dress, and got across the borders. A
mere beast of the chase flying from hunters, he was still in his
metempsychosis no other than the same Monseigneur, the preparation
of whose chocolate for whose lips had once occupied three strong men
besides the cook in question.

  Monseigneur gone, and the three strong men absolving themselves from
the sin of having drawn his high wages, by being more than ready and
willing to cut his throat on the altar of the dawning Republic one and
indivisible of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death,
Monseigneur's house had been first sequestrated, and then confiscated.
For, all things moved so fast, and decree followed decree with that
fierce precipitation, that now upon the third night of the autumn
month of September, patriot emissaries of the law were in possession
of Monseigneur's house, and had marked it with the tricolour, and were
drinking brandy in its state apartments.

  A place of business in London like Tellson's place of business in
Paris, would soon have driven the House out of its mind and into the
Gazette. For, what would staid British responsibility and
respectability have said to orange-trees in boxes in a Bank courtyard,
and even to a Cupid over the counter? Yet such things were.
Tellson's had whitewashed the Cupid, but he was still to be seen on
the ceiling, in the coolest linen, aiming (as he very often does) at
money from morning to night. Bankruptcy must inevitably have come of
this young Pagan, in Lombard-street, London, and also of a curtained
alcove in the rear of the immortal boy, and also of a looking-glass
let into the wall, and also of clerks not at all old, who danced in
public on the slightest provocation. Yet, a French Tellson's could get
on with these things exceedingly well, and, as long as the times
held together, no man had taken fright at them, and drawn out his
money.

  What money would be drawn out of Tellson's henceforth, and what
would lie there, lost and forgotten; what plate and jewels would
tarnish in Tellson's hiding-places, while the depositors rusted in
prisons, and when they should have violently perished; how many
accounts with Tellson's never to be balanced in this world, must be
carried over into the next; no man could have said, that night, any
more than Mr. Jarvis Lorry could, though he thought heavily of these
questions. He sat by a newly-lighted wood fire (the blighted and
unfruitful year was prematurely cold), and on his honest and
courageous face there was a deeper shade than the pendent lamp could
throw, or any object in the room distortedly reflect- a shade of
horror.

  He occupied rooms in the Bank, in his fidelity to the House of which
he had grown to be a part, like strong root-ivy. It chanced that
they derived a kind of security from the patriotic occupation of the
main building, but the true-hearted old gentleman never calculated
about that. All such circumstances were indifferent to him, so that he
did his duty. On the opposite side of the courtyard, under a
colonnade, was extensive standing for carriages- where, indeed, some
carriages of Monseigneur yet stood. Against two of the pillars were
fastened two great flaring flambeaux, and in the light of these,
standing out in the open air, was a large grindstone: a roughly
mounted thing which appeared to have hurriedly been brought there from
some neighbouring smithy, or other workshop. Rising and looking out of
window at these harmless objects, Mr. Lorry shivered, and retired to
his seat by the fire. He had opened, not only the glass window, but
the lattice blind outside it, and he had closed both again, and he
shivered through his frame.

  From the streets beyond the high wall and the strong gate, there
came the usual night hum of the city, with now and then an
indescribable ring in it, weird and unearthly, as if some unwonted
sounds of a terrible nature were going up to Heaven.

  "Thank God said Mr. Lorry, clasping his hands, "that no one near and
dear to me is in this dreadful town to-night. May He have mercy on all
who are in danger!"

  Soon afterwards, the bell at the great gate sounded, and he thought,
"They have come back!" and sat listening. But, there was no loud
irruption into the courtyard, as he had expected, and he heard the
gate clash again, and all was quiet.

  The nervousness and dread that were upon him inspired that vague
uneasiness respecting the Bank, which a great change would naturally
awaken, with such feelings roused. It was well guarded, and he got
up to go among the trusty people who were watching it, when his door
suddenly opened, and two figures rushed in, at sight of which he
fell back in amazement.

  Lucie and her father! Lucie with her arms stretched out to him,
and with that old look of earnestness so concentrated and intensified,
that it seemed as though it had been stamped upon her face expressly
to give force and power to it in this one passage of her life.

  "What is this?" cried Mr. Lorry, breathless and confused. "What is
the matter? Lucie! Manette! What has happened? What has brought you
here? What is it?"

  With the look fixed upon him, in her paleness and wildness, she
panted out in his arms, imploringly, "O my dear friend! My husband!"

  "Your husband, Lucie?"

  "Charles."

  "What of Charles?"

  "Here."

  "Here, in Paris?"

  "Has been here some days- three or four- I don't know how many- I
can't collect my thoughts. An errand of generosity brought him here
unknown to us; he was stopped at the barrier, and sent to prison."

  The old man uttered an irrepressible cry. Almost at the same moment,
the bell of the great gate rang again, and a loud noise of feet and
voices came pouring into the courtyard.

  "What is that noise?" said the Doctor, turning towards the window.

  "Don't look!" cried Mr. Lorry. "Don't look out! Manette, for your
life, don't touch the blind!"

  The Doctor turned, with his hand upon the fastening of the window,
and said, with a cool, bold smile: "My dear friend, I have a charmed
life in this city. I have been a Bastille prisoner. There is no
patriot in Paris- in Paris? In France- who, knowing me to have been
a prisoner in the Bastille, would touch me, except to overwhelm me
with embraces, or carry me in triumph. My old pain has given me a
power that has brought us through the barrier, and gained us news of
Charles there, and brought us here. I knew it would be so; I knew I
could help Charles out of all danger; I told Lucie so.- What is that
noise?" His hand was again upon the window.

  "Don't look!" cried Mr. Lorry, absolutely desperate. "No, Lucie,
my dear, nor you!" He got his arm round her, and held her. "Don't be
so terrified, my love. I solemnly swear to you that I know of no
harm having happened to Charles; that I had no suspicion even of his
being in this fatal place. What prison is he in?"

  "La Force!"

  "La Force! Lucie, my child, if ever you were brave and serviceable
in your life- and you were always both- you will compose yourself now,
to do exactly as I bid you; for more depends upon it than you can
think, or I can say. There is no help for you in any action on your
part to-night; you cannot possibly stir out. I say this, because
what I must bid you to do for Charles's sake, is the hardest thing
to do of all. You must instantly be obedient, still, and quiet. You
must let me put you in a room at the back here. You must leave your
father and me alone for two minutes, and as there are Life and Death
in the world you must not delay."

  "I will be submissive to you. I see in your face that you know I can
do nothing else than this. I know you are true."

  The old man kissed her, and hurried her into his room, and turned
the key; then, came hurrying back to the Doctor, and opened the window
and partly opened the window and partly opened the blind, and put
his hand upon the Doctor's arm, and looked out with him into the
courtyard.

  Looked out upon a throng of men and women: not enough in number,
or near enough, to fill the courtyard: not more than forty or fifty in
all. The people in possession of the house had let them in at the
gate, and they had rushed in to work at the grindstone; it had
evidently been set up there for their purpose, as in a convenient
and retired spot.

  But, such awful workers, and such awful work!

  The grindstone had a double handle, and, turning at it madly were
two men, whose faces, as their long hair flapped back when the
whirlings of the grindstone brought their faces up, were more horrible
and cruel than the visages of the wildest savages in their most
barbarous disguise. False eyebrows and false moustaches were stuck
upon them, and their hideous countenances were all bloody and
sweaty, and all awry with bowling, and all staring and glaring with
beastly excitement and want of sleep. As these ruffians turned and
turned, their matted locks now flung forward over their eyes, now
flung backward over their necks, some women held wine to their
mouths that they might drink; and what with dropping blood, and what
with dropping wine, and what with the stream of sparks struck out of
the stone, all their wicked atmosphere seemed gore and fire. The eye
could not detect one creature in the group free from the smear of
blood. Shouldering one another to get next at the sharpening-stone,
were men stripped to the waist, with the stain all over their limbs
and bodies; men in all sorts of rags, with the stain upon those
rags; men devilishly set off with spoils of women's lace and silk
and ribbon, with the stain dyeing those trifles through and through.
Hatchets, knives, bayonets, swords, all brought to be sharpened,
were all red with it. Some of the hacked swords were tied to the
wrists of those who carried them, with strips of linen and fragments
of dress: ligatures various in kind, but all deep of the one colour.
And as the frantic wielders of these weapons snatched them from the
stream of sparks and tore away into the streets, the same red hue
was red in their frenzied eyes;- eyes which any unbrutalised
beholder would have given twenty years of life, to petrify with a
well-directed gun.

  All this was seen in a moment, as the vision of a drowning man, or
of any human creature at any very great pass, could see a world if
it were there. They drew back from the window, and the Doctor looked
for explanation in his friend's ashy face.

  "They are," Mr. Lorry whispered the words, glancing fearfully
round at the locked room, "murdering the prisoners. If you are sure of
what you say; if you really have the power you think you have- as I
believe you have- make yourself known to these devils, and get taken
to La Force. It may be too late, I don't know, but let it not be a
minute later!"

  Doctor Manette pressed his hand, hastened bareheaded out of the
room, and was in the courtyard when Mr. Lorry regained the blind.

  His streaming white hair, his remarkable face, and the impetuous
confidence of his manner, as he put the weapons aside like water,
carried him in an instant to the heart of the concourse at the
stone. For a few moments there was a pause, and a hurry, and a murmur,
and the unintelligible sound of his voice; and then Mr. Lorry saw him,
surrounded by all, and in the midst of a line of twenty men long,
all linked shoulder to shoulder, and hand to shoulder, hurried out
with cries of- "Live the Bastille prisoner! Help for the Bastille
prisoner's kindred in La Force! Room for the Bastille prisoner in
front there! Save the prisoner Evremonde at La Force!" and a
thousand answering shouts.

  He closed the lattice again with a fluttering heart, closed the
window and the curtain, hastened to Lucie, and told her that her
father was assisted by the people, and gone in search of her
husband. He found her child and Miss Pross with her; but, it never
occurred to him to be surprised by their appearance until a long
time afterwards, when he sat watching them in such quiet as the
night knew.

  Lucie had, by that time, fallen into a stupor on the floor at his
feet, clinging to his hand. Miss Pross had laid the child down on
his own bed, and her head had gradually fallen on the pillow beside
her pretty charge. O the long, long night, with the moans of the
poor wife! And O the long, long night, with no return of her father
and no tidings!

  Twice more in the darkness the bell at the great gate sounded, and
the irruption was repeated, and the grindstone whirled and spluttered.
"What is it?" cried Lucie, affrighted. "Hush! The soldiers' swords are
sharpened there," said Mr. Lorry. "The place is national property now,
and used as a kind of armoury, my love."

  Twice more in all; but, the last spell of work was feeble and
fitful. Soon afterwards the day began to dawn, and he softly
detached himself from the clasping hand, and cautiously looked out
again. A man, so besmeared that he might have been a sorely wounded
soldier creeping back to consciousness on a field of slain, was rising
from the pavement by the side of the grindstone, and looking about him
with a vacant air. Shortly, this worn-out murderer descried in the
imperfect light one of the carriages of Monseigneur, and, staggering
to that gorgeous vehicle, climbed in at the door, and shut himself
up to take his rest on its dainty cushions.

  The great grindstone, Earth, had turned when Mr. Lorry looked out
again, and the sun was red on the courtyard. But, the lesser
grindstone stood alone there in the calm morning air, with a red
upon it that the sun had never given, and would never take away.

  III

  THE SHADOW

  ONE Of the first considerations which arose in the business mind
of Mr. Lorry when business hours came round, was this:- that he had no
right to imperil Tellson's by sheltering the wife of an emigrant
prisoner under the Bank roof. His own possessions, safety, life, he
would have hazarded for Lucie and her child, without a moment's demur;
but the great trust he held was not his own, and as to that business
charge he was a strict man of business.

  At first, his mind reverted to Defarge, and he thought of finding
out the wine-shop again and taking counsel with its master in
reference to the safest dwelling-place in the distracted state of
the city. But, the same consideration that suggested him, repudiated
him; he lived in the most violent Quarter, and doubtless was
influential there, and deep in its dangerous workings.

  Noon coming, and the Doctor not returning, and every minute's
delay tending to compromise Tellson's, Mr. Lorry advised with Lucie.
She said that her father had spoken of hiring a lodging for a short
term, in that Quarter, near the Banking-house. As there was no
business objection to this, and as he foresaw that even if it were all
well with Charles, and he were to be released, he could not hope to
leave the city, Mr. Lorry went out in quest of such a lodging, and
found a suitable one, high up in a removed by-street where the
closed blinds in all the other windows of a high melancholy square
of buildings marked deserted homes.

  To this lodging he at once removed Lucie and her child, and Miss
Pross: giving them what comfort he could, and much more than he had
himself. He left Jerry with them, as a figure to fill a doorway that
would bear considerable knocking on the head, and returned to his
own occupations. A disturbed and doleful mind he brought to bear
upon them, and slowly and heavily the day lagged on with him.

  It wore itself out, and wore him out with it, until the Bank closed.
He was again alone in his room of the previous night, considering what
to do next, when be heard a foot upon the stair. In a few moments, a
man stood in his presence, who, with a keenly observant look at him,
addressed him by his name.

  "Your servant," said Mr. Lorry. "Do you know me?"

  He was a strongly made man with dark curling hair, from forty-five
to fifty years of age. For answer he repeated, without any change of
emphasis, the words:

  "Do you know me?"

  "I have seen you somewhere."

  "Perhaps at my wine-shop?"

  Much interested and agitated, Mr. Lorry said: "You come from
Doctor Manette?"

  "Yes. I come from Doctor Manette."

  "And what says he? What does he send me?"

  Defarge gave into his anxious hand, an open scrap of paper. It
bore the words in the Doctor's writing:

  "Charles is safe, but I cannot safely leave this place yet. I have
obtained the favour that the bearer has a short note from Charles to
his wife. Let the bearer see his wife."

  It was dated from La Force, within an hour.

  "Will you accompany me," said Mr. Lorry, joyfully relieved after
reading this note aloud, "to where his wife resides?"

  "Yes," returned Defarge.

  Scarcely noticing as yet, in what a curiously reserved and
mechanical way Defarge spoke, Mr. Lorry put on his hat and they went
down into the courtyard. There, they found two women; one, knitting.

  "Madame Defarge, surely!" said Mr. Lorry, who had left her in
exactly the same attitude some seventeen years ago.

  "It is she," observed her husband.

