and then that there is a man who would give his life, to keep a life
you love beside you!"

  He said, "Farewell!" said a last "God bless you!" and left her.

  XIV

  THE HONEST TRADESMAN

  To THE EYES of Mr. Jeremiah Cruncher, sitting on his stool in
Fleet-street with his grisly urchin beside him, a vast number and
variety of objects in movement were every day presented. Who could sit
upon anything in Fleet-street during the busy hours of the day, and
not be dazed and deafened by two immense processions, one ever tending
westward with the sun, the other ever tending eastward from the sun,
both ever tending to the plains beyond the range of red and purple
where the sun goes down!

  With his straw in his mouth, Mr. Cruncher sat watching the two
streams, like the heathen rustic who has for several centuries been on
duty watching one stream- saving that Jerry had no expectation of
their ever running dry. Nor would it have been an expectation of a
hopeful kind, since a small part of his income was derived from the
pilotage of timid women (mostly of a full habit and past the middle
term of life) from Tellson's side of the tides to the opposite
shore. Brief as such companionship was in every separate instance, Mr.
Cruncher never failed to become so interested in the lady as to
express a strong desire to have the honour of drinking her very good
health. And it was from the gifts bestowed upon him towards the
execution of this benevolent purpose, that he recruited his
finances, as just now observed.

  Time was, when a poet sat upon a stool in a public place, and
mused in the sight of men. Mr. Cruncher, sitting on a stool in a
public place, but not being a poet, mused as little as possible, and
looked about him.

  It fell out that he was thus engaged in a season when crowds were
few, and belated women few, and when his affairs in general were so
unprosperous as to awaken a strong suspicion in his breast that Mrs.
Cruncher must have been "flopping" in some pointed manner, when an
unusual concourse pouring down Fleet-street westward, attracted his
attention. Looking that way, Mr. Cruncher made out that some kind of
funeral was coming along, and that there was popular objection to this
funeral, which engendered uproar.

  "Young Jerry," said Mr. Cruncher, turning to his offspring, "it's
a buryin'."

  "Hooroar, father!" cried Young Jerry.

  The young gentleman uttered this exultant sound with mysterious
significance. The elder gentleman took the cry so ill, that he watched
his opportunity, and smote the young gentleman on the ear.

  "What d'ye mean? What are you hooroaring at? What do you want to
convey to your own father, you young Rip? This boy is a getting too
many for me!" said Mr. Cruncher, surveying him. "Him and his hooroars!
Don't let me hear no more of you, or you shall feel some more of me.
D'ye hear?"

  "I warn't doing no harm," Young Jerry protested, rubbing his cheek.

  "Drop it then," said Mr. Cruncher; "I won't have none of Your no
harms. Get a top of that there seat, and look at the crowd.

  His son obeyed, and the crowd approached; they were bawling and
hissing round a dingy hearse and dingy mourning coach, in which
mourning coach there was only one mourner, dressed in the dingy
trappings that were considered essential to the dignity of the
position. The position appeared by no means to please him, however,
with an increasing rabble surrounding the coach, deriding him,
making grimaces at him, and incessantly groaning and calling out:
"Yah! Spies! Tst! Yaha! Spies!" with many compliments too numerous and
forcible to repeat.

  Funerals had at all times a remarkable attraction for Mr.
Cruncher; he always pricked up his senses, and became excited, when
a funeral passed Tellson's. Naturally, therefore, a funeral with
this uncommon attendance excited him greatly, and he asked of the
first man who ran against him:

  "What is it, brother? What's it about?"

  "I don't know," said the man. "Spies! Yaha! Tst! Spies!"

  He asked another man. "Who is it?"

  "I don't know," returned the man, clapping his hands to his mouth
nevertheless, and vociferating in a surprising heat and with the
greatest ardour, "Spies! Yaha! Tst, tst! Spi-ies!"

  At length, a person better informed on the merits of the case,
tumbled against him, and from this person he learned that the
funeral was the funeral of one Roger Cly.

  "Was He a spy?" asked Mr. Cruncher.

  "Old Bailey spy," returned his informant. "Yaha! Tst! Yah! Old
Bailey Spi-i-ies!"

  "Why, to be sure!" exclaimed Jerry, recalling the Trial at which
he had assisted. "I've seen him. Dead, is he?"

  "Dead as mutton," returned the other, "and can't be too dead. Have
'em out, there! Spies! Pull 'em out, there! Spies!"

  The idea was so acceptable in the prevalent absence of any idea,
that the crowd caught it up with eagerness, and loudly repeating the
suggestion to have 'em out, and to pull 'em out, mobbed the two
vehicles so closely that they came to a stop. On the crowd's opening
the coach doors, the one mourner scuffled out of himself and was in
their hands for a moment; but he was so alert, and made such good
use of his time, that in another moment he was scouring away up a
bye-street, after shedding his cloak, hat, long hatband, white
pocket-handkerchief, and other symbolical tears.

  These, the people tore to pieces and scattered far and wide with
great enjoyment, while the tradesmen hurriedly shut up their shops;
for a crowd in those times stopped at nothing, and was a monster
much dreaded. They had already got the length of opening the hearse to
take the coffin out, when some brighter genius proposed instead, its
being escorted to its destination amidst general rejoicing.
Practical suggestions being much needed, this suggestion, too, was
received with acclamation, and the coach was immediately filled with
eight inside and a dozen out, while as many people got on the roof
of the hearse as could by any exercise of ingenuity stick upon it.
Among the first of these volunteers was Jerry Cruncher himself, who
modestly concealed his spiky head from the observation of Tellson's,
in the further corner of the mourning coach.

  The officiating undertakers made some protest against these
changes in the ceremonies; but, the river being alarmingly near. and
several voices remarking on the efficacy of cold immersion in bringing
refractory members of the profession to reason, the protest was
faint and brief. The remodelled procession started, with a
chimney-sweep driving the hearse- advised by the regular driver, who
was perched beside him, under close inspection, for the purpose- and
with a pieman, also attended by his cabinet minister, driving the
mourning coach. A bear-leader, a popular street character of the time,
was impressed as an additional ornament, before the cavalcade had gone
far down the Strand; and his bear, who was black and very mangy,
gave quite an Undertaking air to that part of the procession in
which he walked.

  Thus, with beer-drinking, pipe-smoking, song-roaring, and infinite
caricaturing of woe, the disorderly procession went its way,
recruiting at every step, and all the shops shutting up before it. Its
destination was the old church of Saint Pancras, far off in the
fields. It got there in course of time; insisted on pouring into the
burial-ground; finally, accomplished the interment of the deceased
Roger Cly in its own way, and highly to its own satisfaction.

  The dead man disposed of, and the crowd being under the necessity of
providing some other entertainment for itself, another brighter genius
(or perhaps the same) conceived the humour of impeaching casual
passers-by, as Old Bailey spies, and wreaking vengeance on them. Chase
was given to some scores of inoffensive persons who had never been
near the Old Bailey in their lives, in the realisation of this
fancy, and they were roughly hustled and maltreated. The transition to
the sport of window-breaking, and thence to the plundering of
public-houses, was easy and natural. At last, after several hours,
when sundry summer houses had been pulled down, and some area-railings
had been torn up, to arm the more belligerent spirits, a rumour got
about that the Guards were coming. Before this rumour, the crowd
gradually melted away, and perhaps the Guards came, and perhaps they
never came, and this was the usual progress of a mob.

  Mr. Cruncher did not assist at the closing sports, but had
remained behind in the churchyard, to confer and condole with the
undertakers. The place had a soothing influence on him. He procured
a pipe from a neighbouring public-house, and smoked it, looking in
at the railings and maturely considering the spot.

  "Jerry," said Mr. Cruncher, apostrophising himself in his usual way,
"you see that there Cly that day, and you see with your own eyes
that he was a young 'un and a straight made 'un."

  Having smoked his pipe out, and ruminated a little longer, he turned
himself about, that he might appear, before the hour of closing, on
his station at Tellson's. Whether his meditations on mortality had
touched his liver, or whether his general health had been previously
at all amiss, or whether he desired to show a little attention to an
eminent man, is not so much to the purpose, as that he made a short
call upon his medical adviser- a distinguished surgeon- on his way
back.

  Young Jerry relieved his father with dutiful interest, and
reported No job in his absence. The bank closed, the ancient clerks
came out, the usual watch was set, and Mr. Cruncher and his son went
home to tea.

  "Now, I tell you where it is!" said Mr. Cruncher to his wife, on
entering. "If, as a honest tradesman, my wenturs goes wrong
to-night, I shall make sure that you've been praying again me, and I
shall work you for it just the same as if I seen you do it."

  The dejected Mrs. Cruncher shook her head.

  "Why, you're at it afore my face!" said Mr. Cruncher, with signs
of angry apprehension.

  "I am saying nothing."

  "Well, then; don't meditate nothing. You might as well flop as
meditate. You may as well go again me one way as another. Drop it
altogether."

  "Yes, Jerry."

  "Yes, Jerry," repeated Mr. Cruncher sitting down to tea. "Ah! It
is yes, Jerry. That's about it. You may say yes, Jerry."

  Mr. Cruncher had no particular meaning in these sulky
corroborations, but made use of them, as people not unfrequently do,
to express general ironical dissatisfaction.

  "You and your yes, Jerry," said Mr. Cruncher, taking a bite out of
his bread-and-butter, and seeming to help it down with a large
invisible oyster out of his saucer. "Ah! I think so. I believe you."

  "You are going out to-night?" asked his decent wife, when he took
another bite.

  "Yes, I am."

  "May I go with you, father?" asked his son, briskly.

  "No, you mayn't. I'm a going- as your mother knows- a fishing.
That's where I'm going to. Going a fishing."

  "Your fishing-rod gets rayther rusty; don't it, father?"

  "Never you mind."

  "Shall you bring any fish home, father?"

  "If I don't, you'll have short commons, to-morrow," returned that
gentleman, shaking his head; "that's questions enough for you; I ain't
a going out, till you've been long abed."

  He devoted himself during the remainder of the evening to keeping
a most vigilant watch on Mrs. Cruncher, and sullenly holding her in
conversation that she might be prevented from meditating any petitions
to his disadvantage. With this view, he urged his son to hold her in
conversation also, and led the unfortunate woman a hard life by
dwelling on any causes of complaint he could bring against her, rather
than he would leave her for a moment to her own reflections. The
devoutest person could have rendered no greater homage to the efficacy
of an honest prayer than he did in this distrust of his wife. It was
as if a professed unbeliever in ghosts should be frightened by a ghost
story.

  "And mind you!" said Mr. Cruncher. "No games to-morrow! If I, as a
honest tradesman, succeed in providing a jinte of meat or two, none of
your not touching of it, and sticking to bread. If I, as a honest
tradesman, am able to provide a little beer, none of your declaring on
water. When you go to Rome, do as Rome does. Rome will be a ugly
customer to you, if you don't. I'm your Rome, you know."

  Then he began grumbling again:

  "With your flying into the face of your own wittles and drink! I
don't know how scarce you mayn't make the wittles and drink here, by
your flopping tricks and your unfeeling conduct. Look at your boy:
he is your'n, ain't he? He's as thin as a lath. Do you call yourself a
mother, and not know that a mother's first duty is to blow her boy
out?"

  This touched Young Jerry on a tender place; who adjured his mother
to perform her first duty, and, whatever else she did or neglected,
above all things to lay especial stress on the discharge of that
maternal function so affectingly and delicately indicated by his other
parent.

  Thus the evening wore away with the Cruncher family, until Young
Jerry was ordered to bed, and his mother, laid under similar
injunctions, obeyed them. Mr. Cruncher beguiled the earlier watches of
the night with solitary pipes, and did not start upon his excursion
until nearly one o'clock. Towards that small and ghostly hour, he rose
up from his chair, took a key out of his pocket, opened a locked
cupboard, and brought forth a sack, a crowbar of convenient size, a
rope and chain, and other fishing tackle of that nature. Disposing
these articles about him in skilful manner, he bestowed a parting
defiance on Mrs. Cruncher, extinguished the light, and went out.

  Young Jerry, who had only made a feint of undressing when he went to
bed, was not long after his father. Under cover of the darkness he
followed out of the room, followed down the stairs, followed down
the court, followed out into the streets. He was in no uneasiness
concerning his getting into the house again, for it was full of
lodgers, and the door stood ajar all night.

  Impelled by a laudable ambition to study the art and mystery of
his father's honest calling, Young Jerry, keeping as close to house
fronts, walls, and doorways, as his eyes were close to one another,
held his honoured parent in view. The honoured parent steering
Northward, had not gone far, when he was joined by another disciple of
Izaak Walton, and the two trudged on together.

  Within half an hour from the first starting, they were beyond the
winking lamps, and the more than winking watchmen, and were out upon a
lonely road. Another fisherman was picked up here- and that so
silently, that if Young Jerry had been superstitious, he might have
supposed the second follower of the gentle craft to have, all of a
sudden, split himself into two.

  The three went on, and Young Jerry went on, until the three
stopped under a bank overhanging the road. Upon the top of the bank
was a low brick wall, surmounted by an iron railing. In the shadow
of bank and wall the three turned out of the road, and up a blind
lane, of which the wall- there, risen to some eight or ten feet
high- formed one side. Crouching down in a corner, peeping up the
lane, the next object that Young Jerry saw, was the form of his
honoured parent, pretty well defined against a watery and clouded
moon, nimbly scaling an iron gate. He was soon over, and then the
second fisherman got over, and then the third. They all dropped softly
on the ground within the gate, and lay there a little- listening
perhaps. Then, they moved away on their hands and knees.

  It was now Young Jerry's turn to approach the gate: which he did,
holding his breath. Crouching down again in a corner there, and
looking in, he made out the three fishermen creeping through some rank
grass! and all the gravestones in the churchyard- it was a large
churchyard that they were in- looking on like ghosts in white, while
the church tower itself looked on like the ghost of a monstrous giant.
They did not creep far, before they stopped and stood upright. And
then they began to fish.

  They fished with a spade, at first. Presently the honoured parent
appeared to be adjusting some instrument like a great corkscrew.
Whatever tools they worked with, they worked hard, until the awful
striking of the church clock so terrified Young Jerry, that he made
off, with his hair as stiff as his father's.

  But, his long-cherished desire to know more about these matters, not
only stopped him in his running away, but lured him back again. They
were still fishing perseveringly, when he peeped in at the gate for
the second time; but, now they seemed to have got a bite. There was
a screwing and complaining sound down below, and their bent figures
were strained, as if by a weight. By slow degrees the weight broke
away the earth upon it, and came to the surface. Young Jerry very well
knew what it would be; but, when he saw it, and saw his honoured
parent about to wrench it open, he was so frightened, being new to the
sight, that he made off again, and never stopped until he had run a
mile or more.

  He would not have stopped then, for anything less necessary than
breath, it being a spectral sort of race that he ran, and one highly
desirable to get to the end of. He had a strong idea that the coffin
he had seen was running after him; and, pictured as hopping on
behind him, bolt upright, upon its narrow end, always on the point
of overtaking him and hopping on at his side- perhaps taking his
arm- it was a pursuer to shun. It was an inconsistent and ubiquitous
fiend too, for, while it was making the whole night behind him
dreadful, he darted out into the roadway to avoid dark alleys, fearful
of its coming hopping out of them like a dropsical boy's-Kite
without tail and wings. It hid in doorways too, rubbing its horrible
shoulders against doors, and drawing them up to its ears, as if it
were laughing. It got into shadows on the road, and lay cunningly on
its back to trip him up. All this time it was incessantly hopping on
behind and gaining on him, so that when the boy got to his own door he
had reason for being half dead. And even then it would not leave
him, but followed him upstairs with a bump on every stair, scrambled
into bed with him, and bumped down, dead and heavy, on his breast when
he fell asleep.

  From his oppressed slumber, Young Jerry in his closet was awakened
after daybreak and before sunrise, by the presence of his father in
the family room. Something had gone wrong with him; at least, so Young
Jerry inferred, from the circumstance of his holding Mrs. Cruncher
by the ears, and knocking the back of her head against the
head-board of the bed.

  "I told you I would," said Mr. Cruncher, "and I did."

  "Jerry, Jerry, Jerry!" his wife implored.

  "You oppose yourself to the profit of the business," said Jerry,
"and me and my partners suffer. You was to honour and obey; why the
devil don't you?"

  "I try to be a good wife, Jerry," the poor woman protested, with
tears.

  "Is it being a good wife to oppose your husband's business? Is it
honouring your husband to dishonour his business? Is it obeying your
husband to disobey him on the vital subject of his business?"

  "You hadn't taken to the dreadful business then, Jerry."

  "It's enough for you," retorted Mr. Cruncher, "to be the wife of a
honest tradesman, and not to occupy your female mind with calculations
when he took to his trade or when he didn't. A honouring and obeying
wife would let his trade alone altogether. Call yourself a religious
woman? If you're a religious woman, give me a irreligious one! You
have no more nat'ral sense of duty than the bed of this here Thames
river has of a pile, and similarly it must be knocked into you."

  The altercation was conducted in a low tone of voice, and terminated
in the honest tradesman's kicking off his clay-soiled boots, and lying
down at his length on the floor. After taking a timid peep at him
lying on his back, with his rusty hands under his head for a pillow,
his son lay down too, and fell asleep again.

  There was no fish for breakfast, and not much of anything else.
Mr. Cruncher was out of spirits, and out of temper, and kept an iron
pot-lid by him as a projectile for the correction of Mrs. Cruncher. in
case he should observe any symptoms of her saying Grace. He was
brushed and washed at the usual hour, and set off with his son to
pursue his ostensible calling.

  Young Jerry, walking with the stool under his arm at his father's
side along sunny and crowded Fleet-street, was a very different
Young Jerry from him of the previous night, running home through
darkness and solitude from his grim pursuer. His cunning was fresh
with the day, and his qualms were gone with the night- in which
particulars it is not improbable that he had compeers in
Fleet-street and the City of London, that fine morning.

  "Father," said Young Jerry, as they walked along: taking care to
keep at arm's length and to have the stool well between them:
"what's a Resurrection-Man?"

  Mr. Cruncher came to a stop on the pavement before he answered, "How
should I know?"

  "I thought you knowed everything, father," said the artless boy.

  "Hem! Well," returned Mr. Cruncher, going on again, and lifting of
his hat to give his spikes free play, "he's a tradesman."

  "What's his goods, father?" asked the brisk Young Jerry.

  "His goods," said Mr. Cruncher, after turning it over in his mind,
"is a branch of Scientific goods."

  "Persons' bodies, ain't it, father?" asked the lively boy.

  "I believe it is something of that sort," said Mr. Cruncher.

  "Oh, father, I should so like to be a Resurrection-Man when I'm
quite growed up!"

  Mr. Cruncher was soothed, but shook his head in a dubious and
moral way. "It depends upon how you develop your talents. Be careful
to develop your talents, and never to say no more than you can help to
nobody, and there's no telling at the present time what you may not
come to be fit for." As Young Jerry, thus encouraged, went on a few
yards in advance, to plant the stool in the shadow of the Bar, Mr.
Cruncher added to himself: "Jerry, you honest tradesman, there's hopes
wot that boy will yet be a blessing to you, and a recompense to you
for his mother!"

  XV

  KNITTING

  THERE HAD BEEN earlier drinking than usual in the wine-shop of
Monsieur Defarge. As early as six o'clock in the morning, sallow faces
peeping through its barred windows had descried other faces within,
bending over measures of wine. Monsieur Defarge sold a very thin
wine at the best of times, but it would seem to have been an unusually
thin wine that he sold at this time. A sour wine, moreover, or a
souring, for its influence on the mood of those who drank it was to
make them gloomy. No vivacious Bacchanalian flame leaped out of the
pressed grape of Monsieur Defarge: but, a smouldering fire that
burnt in the dark, lay hidden in the dregs of it.

  This had been the third morning in succession, on which there had
been early drinking at the wine-shop of Monsieur Defarge. It had begun
on Monday, and here was Wednesday come. There had been more of early
brooding than drinking; for, many men had listened and whispered and
slunk about there from the time of the opening of the door, who
could not have laid a piece of money on the counter to save their
souls. These were to the full as interested in the place, however,
as if they could have commanded whole barrels of wine; and they glided
from seat to seat, and from corner to corner, swallowing talk in
lieu of drink, with greedy looks.

  Notwithstanding an unusual flow of company, the master of the
wineshop was not visible. He was not missed; for, nobody who crossed
the threshold looked for him, nobody asked for him, nobody wondered to
see only Madame Defarge in her seat, presiding over the distribution
of wine, with a bowl of battered small coins before her, as much
defaced and beaten out of their original impress as the small
coinage of humanity from whose ragged pockets they had come.

  A suspended interest and a prevalent absence of mind, were perhaps
observed by the spies who looked in at the wine-shop, as they looked
in at every place, high and low, from the king's palace to the
criminal's gaol. Games at cards languished, players at dominoes
musingly built towers with them, drinkers drew figures on the tables
with spilt drops of wine, Madame Defarge herself picked out the
pattern on her sleeve with her toothpick, and saw and heard
something inaudible and invisible a long way off.

  Thus, Saint Antoine in this vinous feature of his, until midday.
It was high noontide, when two dusty men passed through his streets
and under his swinging lamps: of whom, one was Monsieur Defarge: the
other a mender of roads in a blue cap. AH adust and athirst, the two
entered the wine-shop. Their arrival had lighted a kind of fire in the
breast of Saint Antoine, fast spreading as they came along, which
stirred and flickered in flames of faces at most doors and windows.
Yet, no one had followed them, and no man spoke when they entered
the wine-shop, though the eyes of every man there were turned upon
them.

  "Good day, gentlemen!" said Monsieur Defarge.

  It may have been a signal for loosening the general tongue. It
elicited an answering chorus of "Good day!"

  "It is bad weather, gentlemen," said Defarge, shaking his head.

  Upon which, every man looked at his neighbour, and then all cast
down their eyes and sat silent. Except one man, who got up and went
out.

  "My wife," said Defarge aloud, addressing Madame Defarge: "I have
travelled certain leagues with this good mender of roads, called
Jacques. I met him- by accident- a day and half's journey out of
Paris. He is a good child, this mender of roads, called Jacques.
Give him to drink, my wife!"

  A second man got up and went out. Madame Defarge set wine before the
mender of roads called Jacques, who doffed his blue cap to the
company, and drank. In the breast of his blouse he carried some coarse
dark bread; he ate of this between whiles, and sat munching and
drinking near Madame Defarge's counter. A third man got up and went
out.

  Defarge refreshed himself with a draught of wine- but, he took
less than was given to the stranger, as being himself a man to whom it
was no rarity- and stood waiting until the countryman had made his
breakfast. He looked at no one present, and no one now looked at
him; not even Madame Defarge, who had taken up her knitting, and was
at work.

  "Have you finished your repast, friend?" he asked, in due season.

  "Yes, thank you."

  "Come, then! You shall see the apartment that I told you you occupy.
It will suit you to a marvel."

  Out of the wine-shop into the street, out of the street into a
courtyard, out of the courtyard up a steep staircase, out of the
staircase into a garret,- formerly the garret where a white-haired man
sat on a low bench, stooping forward and very busy, making shoes.

  No white-haired man was there now; but, the three men were there who
had gone out of the wine-shop singly. And between them and the
white-haired man afar off, was the one small link, that they had
once looked in at him through the chinks in the wall.

  Defarge closed the door carefully, and spoke in a subdued voice:

  "Jacques One, Jacques Two, Jacques Three! This is the witness
encountered by appointment, by me, Jacques Four. He will tell you all.
Speak, Jacques Five!"

  The mender of roads, blue cap in hand, wiped his swarthy forehead
with it, and said, "Where shall I commence, monsieur?"

  "Commence," was Monsieur Defarge's not unreasonable reply, "at the
commencement."

  "I saw him then, messieurs," began the mender of roads, "a year
ago this running summer, underneath the carriage of the Marquis,
hanging by the chain. Behold the manner of it. I leaving my work on
the road, the sun going to bed, the carriage of the Marquis slowly
ascending the hill, he hanging by the chain-like this."

  Again the mender of roads went through the whole performance; in
which he ought to have been perfect by that time, seeing that it had
been the infallible resource and indispensable entertainment of his
village during a whole year.

  Jacques One struck in, and asked if he had ever seen the man before?

  "Never," answered the mender of roads, recovering his perpendicular.

  Jacques Three demanded how he afterwards recognised him then?

  "By his tall figure," said the mender of roads, softly, and with his
finger at his nose. "When Monsieur the Marquis demands that evening,
'Say, what is he like?' I make response, 'Tall as a spectre.'"

  "You should have said, short as a dwarf," returned Jacques Two.

  "But what did I know? The deed was not then accomplished, neither
did he confide in me. Observe! Under those circumstances even, I do
not offer my testimony. Monsieur the Marquis indicates me with his
finger, standing near our little fountain, and says, 'To me! Bring
that rascal!' My faith, messieurs, I offer nothing."

  "He is right there, Jacques," murmured Defarge, to him who had
interrupted. "Go on!"

  "Good!" said the mender of roads, with an air of mystery. "The
tall man is lost, and he is sought- how many months? Nine, ten,
eleven?"

  "No matter, the number," said Defarge. "He is well hidden, but at
last he is unluckily found. Go on!"

  "I am again at work upon the hill-side, and the sun is again about
to go to bed. I am collecting my tools to descend to my cottage down
in the village below, where it is already dark, when I raise my
eyes, and see coming over the hill six soldiers. In the midst of
them is a tall man with his arms bound- tied to his sides- like this!"

  With the aid of his indispensable cap, he represented a man with his
elbows bound fast at his hips, with cords that were knotted behind
him.

  "I stand aside, messieurs, by my heap of stones, to see the soldiers
and their prisoner pass (for it is a solitary road, that, where any
spectacle is well worth looking at), and at first, as they approach, I
see no more than that they are six soldiers with a tall man bound, and
that they are almost black to my sight- except on the side of the
sun going to bed, where they have a red edge, messieurs. Also, I see
that their long shadows are on the hollow ridge on the opposite side
of the road, and are on the hill above it, and are like the shadows of
giants. Also, I see that they are covered with dust, and that the dust
moves with them as they come, tramp, tramp! But when they advance
quite near to me, I recognise the tall man, and he recognises me.
Ah, but he would be well content to precipitate himself over the
hill-side once again, as on the evening when he and I first
encountered, close to the same spot!"

  He described it as if he were there, and it was evident that he
saw it vividly; perhaps he had not seen much in his life.

  "I do not show the soldiers that I recognise the tall man; he does
not show the soldiers that he recognises me; we do it, and we know it,
with our eyes. 'Come on!' says the chief of that company, pointing
to the village, 'bring him fast to his tomb!' and they bring him
faster. I follow. His arms are swelled because of being bound so
tight, his wooden shoes are large and clumsy, and he is lame.
Because he is lame, and consequently slow, they drive him with their
guns-like this!"

  He imitated the action of a man's being impelled forward by the
butt-ends of muskets.

  "As they descend the hill like madmen running a race, he falls. They
laugh and pick him up again. His face is bleeding and covered with
dust, but he cannot touch it; thereupon they laugh again. They bring
him into the village; all the village runs to look; they take him past
the mill, and up to the prison; all the village sees the prison gate
open in the darkness of the night, and swallow him- like this!"

  He opened his mouth as wide as he could, and shut it with a sounding
snap of his teeth. Observant of his unwillingness to mar the effect by
opening it again, Defarge said, "Go on, Jacques."

  "All the village," pursued the mender of roads, on tiptoe and in a
low voice, "withdraws; all the village whispers by the fountain; all
the village sleeps; all the village dreams of that unhappy one, within
the locks and bars of the prison on the crag, and never to come out of
it, except to perish. In the morning, with my tools upon my
shoulder, eating my morsel of black bread as I go, I make a circuit by
the prison, on my way to my work. There I see him, high up, behind the
bars of a lofty iron cage, bloody and dusty as last night, looking
through. He has no hand free, to wave to me; I dare not call to him;
he regards me like a dead man."

  Defarge and the three glanced darkly at one another. The looks of
all of them were dark, repressed, and revengeful, as they listened
to the countryman's story; the manner of all of them, while it was
secret, was authoritative too. They had the air of a rough tribunal;
Jacques One and Two sitting on the old pallet-bed, each with his
chin resting on his hand, and his eyes intent on the road-mender;
Jacques Three, equally intent, on one knee behind them, with his
agitated hand always gliding over the network of fine nerves about his
mouth and nose; Defarge standing between them and the narrator, whom
he had stationed in the light of the window, by turns looking from him
to them, and from them to him.

  "Go on, Jacques," said Defarge.

  "He remains up there in his iron cage some days. The village looks
at him by stealth, for it is afraid. But it always looks up, from a
distance, at the prison on the crag; and in the evening, when the work
of the day is achieved and it assembles to gossip at the fountain, all
faces are turned towards the prison. Formerly, they were turned
towards the posting-house; now, they are turned towards the prison.
They whisper at the fountain, that although condemned to death he will
not be executed; they say that petitions have been presented in Paris,
showing that he was enraged and made mad by the death of his child;
they say that a petition has been presented to the King himself.
What do I know? It is possible. Perhaps yes, perhaps no."

  "Listen then, Jacques," Number One of that name sternly
interposed. "Know that a petition was presented to the King and Queen.
All here, yourself excepted, saw the King take it, in his carriage
in the street, sitting beside the Queen. It is Defarge whom you see
here, who, at the hazard of his life, darted out before the horses,
with the petition in his hand."

  "And once again listen, Jacques!" said the kneeling Number Three:
his fingers ever wandering over and over those fine nerves, with a
strikingly greedy air, as if he hungered for something- that was
neither food nor drink; "the guard, horse and foot, surrounded the
petitioner, and struck him blows. You hear?"

  "I hear, messieurs."

  "Go on then," said Defarge.

  "Again; on the other hand, they whisper at the fountain," resumed
the countryman, "that he is brought down into our country to be
executed on the spot, and that he will very certainly be executed.
They even whisper that because he has slain Monseigneur, and because
Monseigneur was the father of his tenants- serfs- what you will- he
will be executed as a parricide. One old man says at the fountain,
that his right hand, armed with the knife, will be burnt off before
his face; that, into wounds which will be made in his arms, his
breast, and his legs, there will be poured boiling oil, melted lead,
hot resin, wax, and sulphur; finally, that he will be torn limb from
limb by four strong horses. That old man says, all this was actually
done to a prisoner who made an attempt on the life of the late King,
Louis Fifteen. But how do I know if he lies? I am not a scholar."

  "Listen once again then, Jacques!" said the man with the restless
hand and the craving air. "The name of that prisoner was Damiens,
and it was all done in open day, in the open streets of this city of
Paris; and nothing was more noticed in the vast concourse that saw
it done, than the crowd of ladies of quality and fashion, who were fun
of eager attention to the last- to the last, Jacques, prolonged
until nightfall, when he had lost two legs and an arm, and still
breathed! And it was done why, how old are you?"

  "Thirty-five," said the mender of roads, who looked sixty.

  "It was done when you were more than ten years old; you might have
seen it."

  "Enough!" said Defarge, with grim impatience. "Long live the
Devil! Go on."

  "Well! Some whisper this, some whisper that; they speak of nothing
else; even the fountain appears to fall to that tune. At length, on
Sunday night when all the village is asleep, come soldiers, winding
down from the prison, and their guns ring on the stones of the
little street. Workmen dig, workmen hammer, soldiers laugh and sing;
in the morning, by the fountain, there is raised a gallows forty
feet high, poisoning the water."

  The mender of roads looked through rather than at the low ceiling,
and pointed as if he saw the gallows somewhere in the sky.

  "All work is stopped, all assemble there, nobody leads the cows out,
the cows are there with the rest. At midday, the roll of drums.
Soldiers have marched into the prison in the night, and he is in the
midst of many soldiers. He is bound as before, and in his mouth
there is a gag-tied so, with a tight string, making him look almost as
if he laughed." He suggested it, by creasing his face with his two
thumbs, from the corners of his mouth to his ears. "On the top of
the gallows is fixed the knife, blade upwards, with its point in the
air. He is hanged there forty feet high- and is left hanging,
poisoning the water."

  They looked at one another, as he used his blue cap to wipe his
face, on which the perspiration had started afresh while he recalled
the spectacle.

  "It is frightful, messieurs. How can the women and the children draw
water! Who can gossip of an evening, under that shadow! Under it, have
I said? When I left the village, Monday evening as the sun was going
to bed, and looked back from the hill, the shadow struck across the
church, across the mill, across the prison- seemed to strike across
the earth, messieurs, to where the sky rests upon it!"

  The hungry man gnawed one of his fingers as he looked at the other
three, and his finger quivered with the craving that was on him.

  "That's all, messieurs. I left at sunset (as I had been warned to
do), and I walked on, that night and half next day, until I met (as
I was warned I should) this comrade. With him, I came on, now riding
and now walking, through the rest of yesterday and through last night.
And here you see me!"

  After a gloomy silence, the first Jacques said, "Good! You have
acted and recounted faithfully. Will you wait for us a little, outside
the door?"

  "Very willingly," said the mender of roads. Whom Defarge escorted to
the top of the stairs, and, leaving seated there, returned.

  The three had risen, and their heads were together when he came back
to the garret.

  "How say you, Jacques?" demanded Number One. "To be registered?"

  "To be registered, as doomed to destruction," returned Defarge.

  "Magnificent!" croaked the man with the craving.

  "The chateau, and all the race?" inquired the first.

  "The chateau and all the race," returned Defarge. "Extermination."

  The hungry man repeated, in a rapturous croak, "Magnificent!" and
began gnawing another finger.

  "Are you sure," asked Jacques Two, of Defarge, "that no
embarrassment can arise from our manner of keeping the register?
Without doubt it is safe, for no one beyond ourselves can decipher it;
but shall we always be able to decipher it- or, I ought to say, will
she?"

  "Jacques," returned Defarge, drawing himself up, "if madame my
wife undertook to keep the register in her memory alone, she would not
lose a word of it- not a syllable of it. Knitted, in her own
stitches and her own symbols, it will always be as plain to her as the
sun. Confide in Madame Defarge. It would be easier for the weakest
poltroon that lives, to erase himself from existence, than to erase
one letter of his name or crimes from the knitted register of Madame
Defarge."

  There was a murmur of confidence and approval, and then the man
who hungered, asked: "Is this rustic to be sent back soon? I hope
so. He is very simple; is he not a little dangerous?"

  "He knows nothing," said Defarge; "at least nothing more than
would easily elevate himself to a gallows of the same height. I charge
myself with him; let him remain with me; I will take care of him,
and set him on his road. He wishes to see the fine world- the King,
the Queen, and Court; let him see them on Sunday."

  "What?" exclaimed the hungry man, staring. "Is it a good sign,
that he wishes to see Royalty and Nobility?"

  "Jacques," said Defarge; "judiciously show a cat milk, if you wish
her to thirst for it. Judiciously show a dog his natural prey, if
you wish him to bring it down one day."

  Nothing more was said, and the mender of roads, being found
already dozing on the topmost stair, was advised to lay himself down
on the pallet-bed and take some rest. He needed no persuasion, and was
soon asleep.

  Worse quarters than Defarge's wine-shop, could easily have been
found in Paris for a provincial slave of that degree. Saving for a
mysterious dread of madame by which he was constantly haunted, his
life was very new and agreeable. But, madame sat all day at her
counter, so expressly unconscious of him, and so particularly
determined not to perceive that his being there had any connection
with anything below the surface, that he shook in his wooden shoes
whenever his eye lighted on her. For, he contended with himself that
it was impossible to foresee what that lady might pretend next; and he
felt assured that if she should take it into her brightly ornamented
head to pretend that she had seen him do a murder and afterwards
flay the victim, she would infallibly go through with it until the
play was played out.

  Therefore, when Sunday came, the mender of roads was not enchanted
(though he said he was) to find that madame was to accompany
monsieur and himself to Versailles. It was additionally
disconcerting to have madame knitting all the way there, in a public
conveyance; it was additionally disconcerting yet, to have madame in
the crowd in the afternoon, still with her knitting in her hands as
the crowd waited to see the carriage of the King and Queen.

  "You work hard, madame," said a man near her.

  "Yes," answered Madame Defarge; "I have a good deal to do."

  "What do you make, madame?"

  "Many things."

  "For instance-"

  "For instance," returned Madame Defarge, composedly, "shrouds."

  The man moved a little further away, as soon as he could, and the
mender of roads fanned himself with his blue cap: feeling it
mightily close and oppressive. If he needed a King and Queen to
restore him, he was fortunate in having his remedy at hand; for,
soon the large-faced King and the fair-faced Queen came in their
golden coach, attended by the shining Bull's Eye of their Court, a
glittering multitude of laughing ladies and fine lords; and in
jewels and silks and powder and splendour and elegantly spurning
figures and handsomely disdainful faces of both sexes, the mender of
roads bathed himself, so much to his temporary intoxication, that he
cried Long live the King, Long live the Queen, Long live everybody and
everything! as if he had never heard of ubiquitous Jacques in his
time. Then, there were gardens, courtyards, terraces, fountains, green
banks, more King and Queen, more Bull's Eye, more lords and ladies,
more Long live they all! until he absolutely wept with sentiment.
During the whole of this scene, which lasted some three hours, he
had plenty of shouting and weeping and sentimental company, and
throughout Defarge held him by the collar, as if to restrain him
from flying at the objects of his brief devotion and tearing them to
pieces.

  "Bravo!" said Defarge, clapping him on the back when it was over,
like a patron; "you are a good boy!"

  The mender of roads was now coming to himself, and was mistrustful
of having made a mistake in his late demonstrations; but no.

  "You are the fellow we want," said Defarge, in his ear; "you make
these fools believe that it will last for ever. Then, they are the
more insolent, and it is the nearer ended."

  "Hey!" cried the mender of roads, reflectively; "that's true."

  "These fools know nothing. while they despise your breath, and would
stop it for ever and ever, in you or in a hundred like you rather than
in one of their own horses or dogs, they only know what your breath
tells them. Let it deceive them, then, a little longer; it cannot
deceive them too much."

  Madame Defarge looked superciliously at the client, and nodded in
confirmation.

  "As to you," said she, "you would shout and shed tears for anything,
if it made a show and a noise. Say! Would you not?"

  "Truly, madame, I think so. For the moment."

  "If you were shown a great heap of dolls, and were set upon them
to pluck them to pieces and despoil them for your own advantage, you
would pick out the richest and gayest. Say! Would you not?"

  "Truly yes, madame."

  "Yes. And if you were shown a flock of birds, unable to fly, and
were set upon them to strip them of their feathers for your own
advantage, you would set upon the birds of the finest feathers;
would you not?"

  "It is true, madame."

  "You have seen both dolls and birds to-day," said Madame Defarge,
with a wave of her hand towards the place where they had last been
apparent; "now, go home!"

  XVI

  STILL KNITTING

  MADAME DEFARGE and monsieur her husband returned amicably to the
bosom of Saint Antoine, while a speck in a blue cap toiled through the
darkness, and through the dust, and down the weary miles of avenue
by the wayside, slowly tending towards that point of the compass where
the chateau of Monsieur the Marquis, now in his grave, listened to the
whispering trees. Such ample leisure had the stone faces, now, for
listening to the trees and to the fountain, that the few village
scarecrows who, in their quest for herbs to eat and fragments of
dead stick to burn, strayed within sight of the great stone
courtyard and terrace staircase, had it borne in upon their starved
fancy that the expression of the faces was altered. A rumour just
lived in the village- had a faint and bare existence there, as its
people had- that when the knife struck home, the faces changed, from
faces of pride to faces of anger and pain; also, that when that
dangling figure was hauled up forty feet above the fountain, they
changed again, and bore a cruel look of being avenged, which they
would henceforth bear for ever. In the stone face over the great
window of the bed-chamber where the murder was done, two fine dints
were pointed out in the sculptured nose, which everybody recognised,
and which nobody had seen of old; and on the scarce occasions when two
or three ragged peasants emerged from the crowd to take a hurried peep
at Monsieur the Marquis petrified, a skinny finger would not have
pointed to it for a minute, before they all started away among the
moss and leaves, like the more fortunate hares who could find a living
there.

  Chateau and hut, stone face and dangling figure, the red stain on
the stone floor, and the pure water in the village well- thousands
of acres of land- a whole province of France- all France itself- lay
under the night sky, concentrated into a faint hair-breadth line. So
does a whole world, with all its greatnesses and littlenesses, lie
in a twinkling star. And as mere human knowledge can split a ray of
light and analyse the manner of its composition, so, sublimer
intelligences may read in the feeble shining of this earth of ours,
every thought and act, every vice and virtue, of every responsible
creature on it.

  The Defarges, husband and wife, came lumbering under the
starlight, in their public vehicle, to that gate of Paris whereunto
their journey naturally tended. There was the usual stoppage at the
barrier guardhouse, and the usual lanterns came glancing forth for the
usual examination and inquiry. Monsieur Defarge alighted; knowing
one or two of the soldiery there, and one of the police. The latter he
was intimate with, and affectionately embraced.

  When Saint Antoine had again enfolded the Defarges in his dusky
wings, and they, having finally alighted near the Saint's
boundaries, were picking their way on foot through the black mud and
offal of his streets, Madame Defarge spoke to her husband:

  "Say then, my friend; what did Jacques of the police tell thee?"

  "Very little to-night, but all he knows. There is another spy
commissioned for our quarter. There may be many more, for all that
he can say, but he knows of one."

  "Eh well!" said Madame Defarge, raising her eyebrows with a cool
business air. "It is necessary to register him. How do they call
that man?"

  "He is English."

  "So much the better. His name?"

  "Barsad," said Defarge, making it French by pronunciation. But, he
had been so careful to get it accurately, that he then spelt it with
perfect correctness.

  "Barsad," repeated madame. "Good. Christian name?"

  "John."

  "John Barsad," repeated madame, after murmuring it once to
herself. "Good. His appearance; is it known?"

  "Age, about forty years; height, about five feet nine; black hair;
complexion dark; generally, rather handsome visage; eyes dark, face
thin, long, and sallow; nose aquiline, but not straight, having a
peculiar inclination towards the left cheek; expression, therefore,
sinister."

  "Eh my faith. It is a portrait!" said madame, laughing. "He shall be
registered to-morrow."

  They turned into the wine-shop, which was closed (for it was
midnight), and where Madame Defarge immediately took her post at her
desk, counted the small moneys that had been taken during her
absence examined the stock, went through the entries in the book, made
other entries of her own, checked the serving man in every possible
way, and finally dismissed him to bed. Then she turned out the
contents of the bowl of money for the second time, and began
knotting them up in her handkerchief, in a chain of separate knots,
for safe keeping through the night. All this while, Defarge, with
his pipe in his mouth, walked up and down, complacently admiring,
but never interfering; in which condition, indeed, as to the
business and his domestic affairs, he walked up and down through life.

  The night was hot, and the shop, close shut and surrounded by so
foul a neighbourhood, was ill-smelling. Monsieur Defarge's olfactory
sense was by no means delicate, but the stock of wine smelt much
stronger than it ever tasted, and so did the stock of rum and brandy
and aniseed. He whiffed the compound of scents away, as he put down
his smoked-out pipe.

  "You are fatigued," said madame, raising her glance as she knotted
the money. "There are only the usual odours."

  "I am a little tired," her husband acknowledged.

  "You are a little depressed, too," said madame, whose quick eyes had
never been so intent on the accounts, but they had had a ray or two
for him. "Oh, the men, the men!"

  "But my dear!" began Defarge.

  "But my dear!" repeated madame, nodding firmly; "but my dear!

  You are faint of heart to-night, my dear!"

  "Well, then," said Defarge, as if a thought were wrung out of his
breast, "it is a long time."

  "It is a long time," repeated his wife; "and when is it not a long
time? Vengeance and retribution require a long time; it is the rule."

  "It does not take a long time to strike a man with Lightning,"
said Defarge.

  "How long," demanded madame, composedly, "does it take to make and
store the lightning? Tell me."

  Defarge raised his head thoughtfully, as if there were something
in that too.

  "It does not take a long time," said madame, "for an earthquake to
swallow a town. Eh well! Tell me how long it takes to prepare the
earthquake?"

  "A long time, I suppose," said Defarge.

  "But when it is ready, it takes place, and grinds to pieces
everything before it. In the meantime, it is always preparing,
though it is not seen or heard. That is your consolation. Keep it."

  She tied a knot with flashing eyes, as if it throttled a foe.

  "I tell thee," said madame, extending her right hand, for
emphasis, "that although it is a long time on the road, it is on the
road and coming. I tell thee it never retreats, and never stops. I
tell thee it is always advancing. Look around and consider the lives
of all the world that we know, consider the faces of all the world
that we know, consider the rage and discontent to which the
Jacquerie addresses itself with more and more of certainty every hour.
Can such things last? Bah! I mock you."

  "My brave wife," returned Defarge, standing before her with his head
a little bent, and his hands clasped at his back, like a docile and
attentive pupil before his catechist, "I do not question all this. But
it has lasted a long time, and it is possible- you know well, my wife,
it is possible- that it may not come, during our lives."

  "Eh well! How then?" demanded madame, tying another knot, as if
there were another enemy strangled.

  "Well!" said Defarge, with a half complaining and half apologetic
shrug. "We shall not see the triumph."

  "We shall have helped it," returned madame, with her extended hand
in strong action. "Nothing that we do, is done in vain. I believe,
with all my soul, that we shall see the triumph. But even if not, even
if I knew certainly not, show me the neck of an aristocrat and tyrant,
and still I would--"

  Then madame, with her teeth set, tied a very terrible knot indeed.

  "Hold!" cried Defarge, reddening a little as if he felt charged with
cowardice; "I too, my dear, will stop at nothing."

  "Yes! But it is your weakness that you sometimes need to see your
victim and your opportunity, to sustain you. Sustain yourself
without that. When the time comes, let loose a tiger and a devil;
but wait for the time with the tiger and the devil chained- not shown-
yet always ready."

  Madame enforced the conclusion of this piece of advice by striking
her little counter with her chain of money as if she knocked its
brains out, and then gathering the heavy handkerchief under her arm in
a serene manner, and observing that it was time to go to bed.

  Next noontide saw the admirable woman in her usual place in the
wine-shop, knitting away assiduously. A rose lay beside her, and if
she now and then glanced at the flower, it was with no infraction of
her usual preoccupied air. There were a few customers, drinking or not
drinking, standing or seated, sprinkled about. The day was very hot,
and heaps of flies, who were extending their inquisitive and
adventurous perquisitions into all the glutinous little glasses near
madame, fell dead at the bottom. Their decease made no impression on
the other flies out promenading, who looked at them in the coolest
manner (as if they themselves were elephants, or something as far
removed), until they met the same fate. Curious to consider how
heedless flies are!- perhaps they thought as much at Court that
sunny summer day.

  A figure entering at the door threw a shadow on Madame Defarge which
she felt to be a new one. She laid down her knitting, and began to pin
her rose in her head-dress, before she looked at the figure.

  It was curious. The moment Madame Defarge took up the rose, the
customers ceased talking, and began gradually to drop out of the
wineshop.

  "Good day, madame," said the new-comer.

  "Good day, monsieur."

  She said it aloud, but added to herself, as she resumed her
knitting: "Hah! Good day, age about forty, height about five feet
nine, black hair, generally rather handsome visage, complexion dark,
eyes dark, thin, long and sallow face, aquiline nose but not straight,
having a peculiar inclination towards the left cheek which imparts a
sinister expression! Good day, one and all!"

  "Have the goodness to give me a little glass of old cognac, and a
mouthful of cool fresh water, madame."

  Madame complied with a polite air.

  "Marvellous cognac this, madame!"

  It was the first time it had ever been so complimented, and Madame
Defarge knew enough of its antecedents to know better. She said,
however, that the cognac was flattered, and took up her knitting.
The visitor watched her fingers for a few moments, and took the
opportunity of observing the place in general.

  "You knit with great skill, madame."

  "I am accustomed to it."

  "A pretty pattern too!"

  "You think so?" said madame, looking at him with a smile.

  "Decidedly. May one ask what it is for?"

  "Pastime," said madame, still looking at him with a smile while
her fingers moved nimbly.

  "Not for use?"

  "That depends. I may find a use for it one day. If I do-- Well,"
said madame, drawing a breath and nodding her head with a stern kind
of coquetry, "I'll use it!"

  It was remarkable; but, the taste of Saint Antoine seemed to be
decidedly opposed to a rose on the head-dress of Madame Defarge. Two
men had entered separately, and had been about to order drink, when,
catching sight of that novelty, they faltered, made a pretence of
looking about as if for some friend who was not there, and went
away. Nor, of those who had been there when this visitor entered,
was there one left. They had all dropped off. The spy had kept his
eyes open, but had been able to detect no sign. They had lounged
away in a poverty stricken, purposeless, accidental manner, quite
natural and unimpeachable.

  "JOHN," thought madame, checking off her work as her fingers
knitted, and her eyes looked at the stranger. "Stay long enough, and I
shall knit 'BARSAD' before you go."

  "You have a husband, madame?"

  "I have."

  "Children?"

  "No children."

  "Business seems bad?"

  "Business is very bad; the people are so poor."

  "Ah, the unfortunate, miserable people! So oppressed, too- as you
say."

  "As you say," madame retorted, correcting him, and deftly knitting
an extra something into his name that boded him no good.

  "Pardon me; certainly it was I who said so, but you naturally
think so. Of course."

  "I think?" returned madame, in a high voice. "I and my husband
have enough to do to keep this wine-shop open, without thinking. All
we think, here, is how to live. That is the subject we think of, and
it gives us, from morning to night, enough to think about, without
embarrassing our heads concerning others. I think for others? No, no."

   The spy, who was there to pick up any crumbs he could find or make,
did not allow his baffled state to express itself in his sinister
face; but, stood with an air of gossiping gallantry, leaning his elbow
on Madame Defarge's little counter, and occasionally sipping his
cognac.

  "A bad business this, madame, of Gaspard's execution. Ah! the poor
Gaspard!" With a sigh of great compassion.

  "My faith!" returned madame, coolly and lightly, "if people use
knives for such purposes, they have to pay for it. He knew
beforehand what the price of his luxury was; he has paid the price."

  "I believe," said the spy, dropping his soft voice to a tone that
invited confidence, and expressing an injured revolutionary
susceptibility in every muscle of his wicked face: "I believe there is
much compassion and anger in this neighbourhood, touching the poor
fellow? Between ourselves."

  "Is there?" asked madame, vacantly.

  "Is there not?"

  "-Here is my husband!" said Madame Defarge.

  As the keeper of the wine-shop entered at the door, the spy
saluted him by touching his hat, and saying, with an engaging smile,
"Good day, Jacques!" Defarge stopped short, and stared at him.

  "Good day, Jacques!" the spy repeated; with not quite so much
confidence, or quite so easy a smile under the stare.

  "You deceive yourself, monsieur," returned the keeper of the
wineshop. "You mistake me for another. That is not my name. I am
Ernest Defarge."

  "It is all the same," said the spy, airily, but discomfited too:
"good day!

  "Good day!" answered Defarge, drily.

  "I was saying to madame, with whom I had the pleasure of chatting
when you entered, that they tell me there is- and no wonder!- much
sympathy and anger in Saint Antoine, touching the unhappy fate of poor
Gaspard."

  "No one has told me so," said Defarge, shaking his head. "I know
nothing of it."

  Having said it, he passed behind the little counter, and stood
with his hand on the back of his wife's chair, looking over that
barrier at the person to whom they were both opposed, and whom
either of them would have shot with the greatest satisfaction.

  The spy, well used to his business, did not change his unconscious
attitude, but drained his little glass of cognac, took a sip of
fresh water, and asked for another glass of cognac. Madame Defarge
poured it out for him, took to her knitting again, and hummed a little
song over it.

  "You seem to know this quarter well; that is to say, better than I
do?" observed Defarge.

  "Not at all, but I hope to know it better. I am so profoundly
interested in its miserable inhabitants."

  "Hah!" muttered Defarge.

  "The pleasure of conversing with you, Monsieur Defarge, recalls to
me," pursued the spy, "that I have the honour of cherishing some
interesting associations with your name."

  "Indeed!" said Defarge, with much indifference.

  "Yes, indeed. When Doctor Manette was released, you, his old
domestic, had the charge of him, I know. He was delivered to you.
You see I am informed of the circumstances?"

  "Such is the fact, certainly," said Defarge. He had had it
conveyed to him, in an accidental touch of his wife's elbow as she
knitted and warbled, that he would do best to answer, but always
with brevity.

  "It was to you," said the spy, "that his daughter came; and it was
from your care that his daughter took him, accompanied by a neat brown
monsieur; how is he called?- in a little wig- Lorry- of the bank of
Tellson and Company- over to England."

  "Such is the fact," repeated Defarge.

  "Very interesting remembrances!" said the spy. "I have known
Doctor Manette and his daughter, in England."

  "Yes?" said Defarge.

  "You don't hear much about them now?" said the spy.

  "No," said Defarge.

  "In effect," madame struck in, looking up from her work and her
little song, "we never hear about them. We received the news of
their safe arrival, and perhaps another letter, or perhaps two; but,
since then, they have gradually taken their road in life- we, ours-
and we have held no correspondence."

  "Perfectly so, madame," replied the spy. "She is going to be
married."

  "Going?" echoed madame. "She was pretty enough to have been
married long ago. You English are cold, it seems to me."

  "Oh! You know I am English."

  "I perceive your tongue is," returned madame; "and what the tongue
is, I suppose the man is."

  He did not take the identification as a compliment; but he made
the best of it, and turned it off with a laugh. After sipping his
cognac to the end, he added:

  "Yes, Miss Manette is going to be married. But not to an Englishman;
to one who, like herself, is French by birth. And speaking of
Gaspard (ah, poor Gaspard! It was cruel, cruel!), it is a curious
thing that she is going to marry the nephew of Monsieur the Marquis,
for whom Gaspard was exalted to that height of so many feet; in
other words, the present Marquis. But he lives unknown in England,
he is no Marquis there; he is Mr. Charles Darnay. D'Aulnais is the
name of his mother's family."

  Madame Defarge knitted steadily, but the intelligence had a palpable
effect upon her husband. Do what he would, behind the little
counter, as to the striking of a light and the lighting of his pipe,
he was troubled, and his hand was not trustworthy. The spy would
have been no spy if he had failed to see it, or to record it in his
mind.

  Having made, at least, this one hit, whatever it might prove to be
worth, and no customers coming in to help him to any other, Mr. Barsad
paid for what he had drunk, and took his leave: taking occasion to
say, in a genteel manner, before he departed, that he looked forward
to the pleasure of seeing Monsieur and Madame Defarge again. For
some minutes after he had emerged into the outer presence of Saint
Antoine, the husband and wife remained exactly as he had left them,
lest he should come back.

  "Can it be true," said Defarge, in a low voice, looking down at
his wife as he stood smoking with his hand on the back of her chair:
"what he has said of Ma'amselle Manette?"

  "As he has said it," returned madame, lifting her eyebrows a little,
"it is probably false. But it may be true."

  "If it is-" Defarge began, and stopped.

  "If it is?" repeated his wife.

  "-And if it does come, while we live to see it triumph- I hope,
for her sake, Destiny will keep her husband out of France."

  "Her husband's destiny," said Madame Defarge, with her usual
composure, "will take him where he is to go, and will lead him to
the end that is to end him. That is all I know."

  "But it is very strange- now, at least, is it not very strange"-
said Defarge, rather pleading with his wife to induce her to admit it,
"that, after all our sympathy for Monsieur her father, and herself,
her husband's name should be proscribed under your hand at this
moment, by the side of that infernal dog's who has just left us?"

  "Stranger things than that will happen when it does come,"
answered madame. "I have them both here, of a certainty; and they
are both here for their merits; that is enough."

  She rolled up her knitting when she had said those words, and
presently took the rose out of the handkerchief that was wound about
her head. Either Saint Antoine had an instinctive sense that the
objectionable decoration was gone, or Saint Antoine was on the watch
for its disappearance; howbeit, the Saint took courage to lounge in,
very shortly afterwards, and the wine-shop recovered its habitual
aspect.

  In the evening, at which season of all others Saint Antoine turned
himself inside out, and sat on door-steps and window-ledges, and
came to the corners of vile streets and courts, for a breath of air,
Madame Defarge with her work in her hand was accustomed to pass from
place to place and from group to group: a Missionary- there were
many like her- such as the world will do well never to breed again.
All the women knitted. They knitted worthless things; but, the
mechanical work was a mechanical substitute for eating and drinking;
the hands moved for the jaws and the digestive apparatus: if the
bony fingers had been still, the stomachs would have been more
famine-pinched.

  But, as the fingers went, the eyes went, and the thoughts. And as
Madame Defarge moved on from group to group, all three went quicker
and fiercer among every little knot of women that she had spoken with,
and left behind.

  Her husband smoked at his door, looking after her with admiration.
"A great woman," said he, "a strong woman, a grand woman, a
frightfully grand woman!"

  Darkness closed around, and then came the ringing of church bells
and the distant beating of the military drums in the Palace Courtyard,
as the women sat knitting, knitting. Darkness encompassed them.
Another darkness was closing in as surely, when the church bells, then
ringing pleasantly in many an airy steeple over France, should be
melted into thundering cannon; when the military drums should be
beating to drown a wretched voice, that night all potent as the
voice of Power and Plenty, Freedom and Life. So much was closing in
about the women who sat knitting, knitting, they their very selves
were closing in around a structure yet unbuilt, where they were to sit
knitting, knitting, dropping heads.

  XVII

  ONE NIGHT

  NEVER DID the sun go down with a brighter glory on the quiet
corner in Soho, than one memorable evening when the Doctor and his
daughter sat under the plane-tree together. Never did the moon rise
with a milder radiance over great London, than on that night when it
found them still seated under the tree, and shone upon their faces
through its leaves.

  Lucie was to be married to-morrow. She had reserved this last
evening for her father, and they sat alone under the plane-tree.

  "You are happy, my dear father?"

  "Quite, my child."

  ---$$$---

  They had said little, though they had been there a long time. When
it was yet light enough to work and read, she had neither engaged
herself in her usual work, nor had she read to him. She had employed
herself in both ways, at his side under the tree, many and many a
time; but, this time was not quite like any other, and nothing could
make it so.

  "And I am very happy to-night, dear father. I am deeply happy in the
love that Heaven has so blessed- my love for Charles, and Charles's
love for me. But, if my life were not to be still consecrated to
you, or if my marriage were so arranged as that it would part us, even
by the length of a few of these streets, I should be more unhappy
and self-reproachful now than I can tell you. Even as it is--"

  Even as it was, she could not command her voice.

  In the sad moonlight, she clasped him by the neck, and laid her face
upon his breast. In the moonlight which is always sad, as the light of
the sun itself is- as the light called human life is- at its coming
and its going.

  "Dearest dear! Can you tell me, this last time, that you feel quite,
quite sure, no new affections of mine, and no new duties of mine, will
ever interpose between us? I know it well, but do you know it? In your
own heart, do you feel quite certain?"

  Her father answered, with a cheerful firmness of conviction he could
scarcely have assumed, "Quite sure, my darling! More than that," he
added, as he tenderly kissed her: "my future is far brighter, Lucie,
seen through your marriage, than it could have been- nay, than it ever
was- without it."

  "If I could hope that, my father!--"

  "Believe it, love! Indeed it is so. Consider how natural and how
plain it is, my dear, that it should be so. You, devoted and young,
cannot fully appreciate the anxiety I have felt that your life
should not be wasted--"

  She moved her hand towards his lips, but he took it in his, and
repeated the word.

  "-wasted, my child- should not be wasted, struck aside from the
natural order of things- for my sake. Your unselfishness cannot
entirely comprehend how much my mind has gone on this; but, only ask
yourself, how could my happiness be perfect, while yours was
incomplete?"

  "If I had never seen Charles, my father, I should have been quite
happy with you."

  He smiled at her unconscious admission that she would have been
unhappy without Charles, having seen him; and replied:

  "My child, you did see him, and it is Charles. If it had not been
Charles, it would have been another. Or, if it had been no other, I
should have been the cause, and then the dark part of my life would
have cast its shadow beyond myself, and would have fallen on you."

  It was the first time, except at the trial, of her ever hearing
him refer to the period of his suffering. It gave her a strange and
new sensation while his words were in her ears; and she remembered
it long afterwards.

  "See!" said the Doctor of Beauvais, raising his hand towards the
moon. "I have looked at her from my prison-window, when I could not
bear her fight. I have looked at her when it has been such torture
to me to think of her shining upon what I had lost, that I have beaten
my head against my prison-walls. I have looked at her, in a state so
dull and lethargic, that I have thought of nothing but the number of
horizontal lines I could draw across her at the full, and the number
of perpendicular lines with which I could intersect them." He added in
his inward and pondering manner, as he looked at the moon, "It was
twenty either way, I remember, and the twentieth was difficult to
squeeze in."

  The strange thrill with which she heard him go back to that time,
deepened as he dwelt upon it; but, there was nothing to shock her in
the manner of his reference. He only seemed to contrast his present
cheerfulness and felicity with the dire endurance that was over.

  "I have looked at her, speculating thousands of times upon the
unborn child from whom I had been rent. Whether it was alive.
Whether it had been born alive, or the poor mother's shock had
killed it. Whether it was a son who would some day avenge his
father. (There was a time in my imprisonment, when my desire for
vengeance was unbearable.) Whether it was a son who would never know
his father's story; who might even live to weigh the possibility of
his father's having disappeared of his own will and act. Whether it
was a daughter who would grow to be a woman."

  She drew closer to him, and kissed his cheek and his hand.

  "I have pictured my daughter, to myself, as perfectly forgetful of
me- rather, altogether ignorant of me, and unconscious of me. I have
cast up the years of her age, year after year. I have seen her married
to a man who knew nothing of my fate. I have altogether perished
from the remembrance of the living, and in the next generation my
place was a blank."

  "My father! Even to hear that you had such thoughts of a daughter
who never existed, strikes to my heart as if I had been that child."

  "You, Lucie? It is out of the consolation and restoration you have
brought to me, that these remembrances arise, and pass between us
and the moon on this last night.- What did I say just now?"

  "She knew nothing of you. She cared nothing for you."

  "So! But on other moonlight nights, when the sadness and the silence
have touched me in a different way- have affected me with something as
like a sorrowful sense of peace, as any emotion that had pain for
its foundations could- I have imagined her as coming to me in my cell,
and leading me out into the freedom beyond the fortress. I have seen
her image in the moonlight often, as I now see you; except that I
never held her in my arms; it stood between the little grated window
and the door. But, you understand that that not the child I am
speaking of?"

  "The figure was not; the- the- image; the fancy?"

  "No. That was another thing. It stood before my disturbed sense of
sight, but it never moved. The phantom that my mind pursued, was
another and more real child. Of her outward appearance I know no
more than that she was like her mother. The other had that likeness
too- as you have- but was not the same. Can you follow me, Lucie?
Hardly, I think? I doubt you must have been a solitary prisoner to
understand these perplexed distinctions."

  His collected and calm manner could not prevent her blood from
running cold, as he thus tried to anatomise his old condition.

  "In that more peaceful state, I have imagined her, in the moonlight,
coming to me and taking me out to show me that the home of her married
life was full of her loving remembrance of her lost father. My picture
was in her room, and I was in her prayers. Her life was active,
cheerful, useful; but my poor history pervaded it all."

  "I was that child, my father, I was not half so good, but in my love
that was I."
