  "And as such," quoth Mr. Lorry, whom the counsel learned in the
law had now shouldered back into the group, just as he had
previously shouldered him out of it- "as such I will appeal to
Doctor Manette, to break up this conference and order us all to our
homes. Miss Lucie looks ill, Mr. Darnay has had a terrible day, we are
worn out."

  "Speak for yourself, Mr. Lorry," said Stryver; "I have a night's
work to do yet. Speak for yourself."

  "I speak for myself," answered Mr. Lorry, "and for Mr. Darnay, and
for Miss Lucie, and- Miss Lucie, do you not think I may speak for us
all?" He asked her the question pointedly, and with a glance at her
father.

  His face had become frozen, as it were, in a very curious look at
Darnay; an intent look, deepening into a frown of dislike and
distrust, not even unmixed with fear. With this strange expression
on him his thoughts had wandered away.

  "My father," said Lucie, softly laying her hand on his.

  He slowly shook the shadow off, and turned to her.

  "Shall we go home, my father?"

  With a long breath, he answered "Yes."

  The friends of the acquitted prisoner had dispersed, under the
impression- which he himself had originated- that he would not be
released that night. The lights were nearly all extinguished in the
passages, the iron gates were being closed with a jar and a rattle,
and the dismal place was deserted until to-morrow morning's interest
of gallows, pillory, whipping-post, and branding-iron, should repeople
it. Walking between her father and Mr. Darnay, Lucie Manette passed
into the open air. A hackney-coach was called, and the father and
daughter departed in it.

  Mr. Stryver had left them in the passages, to shoulder his way
back to the robing-room. Another person, who had not joined the group,
or interchanged a word with any one of them, but who had been
leaning against the wall where its shadow was darkest, had silently
strolled out after the rest, and had looked on until the coach drove
away. He now stepped up to where Mr. Lorry and Mr. Darnay stood upon
the pavement.

  "So, Mr. Lorry! Men of business may speak to Mr. Darnay now?"

  Nobody had made any acknowledgment of Mr. Carton's part in the day's
proceedings; nobody had known of it. He was unrobed, and was none
the better for it in appearance.

  "If you knew what a conflict goes on in the business mind, when
the business mind is divided between good-natured impulse and business
appearances, you would be amused, Mr. Darnay."

  Mr. Lorry reddened, and said, warmly, "You have mentioned that
before, sir. We men of business, who serve a House, are not our own
masters. We have to think of the House more than ourselves."

  "I know, I know," rejoined Mr. Carton, carelessly. "Don't be
nettled, Mr. Lorry. You are as good as another, I have no doubt:
better, I dare say."

  "And indeed, sir," pursued Mr. Lorry, not minding him, "I really
don't know what you have to do with the matter. If you'll excuse me,
as very much your elder, for saying so, I really don't know that it is
your business."

  "Business! Bless you, I have no business," said Mr. Carton.

  "It is a pity you have not, sir."

  "I think so, too."

  "If you had," pursued Mr. Lorry, "perhaps you would attend to it."

  "Lord love you, no!- I shouldn't," said Mr. Carton.

  "Well, sir!" cried Mr. Lorry, thoroughly heated by his indifference,
"business is a very good thing, and a very respectable thing. And,
sir, if business imposes its restraints and its silences and
impediments, Mr. Darnay as a young gentleman of generosity knows how
to make allowance for that circumstance. Mr. Darnay, good night, God
bless you, sir! I hope you have been this day preserved for a
prosperous and happy life.- Chair there!"

  Perhaps a little angry with himself, as well the barrister, Mr.
Lorry bustled into the chair, and was carried off to Tellson's.
Carton, who smelt of port wine, and did not appear to be quite
sober, laughed then, and turned to Darnay:

  "This is a strange chance that throws you and me together. This must
be a strange night to you, standing alone here with your counterpart
on these street stones?"

  "I hardly seem yet," returned Charles Darnay, "to belong to this
world again."

  "I don't wonder at it; it's not so long since you were pretty far
advanced on your way to another. You speak faintly."

  "I begin to think I am faint."

  "Then why the devil don't you dine? I dined, myself, while those
numskulls were deliberating which world you should belong to- this, or
some other. Let me show you the nearest tavern to dine well at."

  Drawing his arm through his own, he took him down Ludgate-hill to
Fleet-street, and so, up a covered way, into a tavern. Here, they were
shown into a little room, where Charles Darnay was soon recruiting his
strength with a good plain dinner and good wine: while Carton sat
opposite to him at the same table, with his separate bottle of port
before him, and his fully half-insolent manner upon him.

  "Do you feel, yet, that you belong to this terrestrial scheme again,
Mr. Darnay?"

  "I am frightfully confused regarding time and place; but I am so far
mended as to feel that."

  "It must be an immense satisfaction!"

  He said it bitterly, and filled up his glass again: which was a
large one.

  "As to me, the greatest desire I have, is to forget that I belong to
it. It bas no good in it for me- except wine like this- nor I for
it. So we are not much alike in that particular. Indeed, I begin to
think we are not much alike in any particular, you and I."

  Confused by the emotion of the day, and feeling his being there with
this Double of coarse deportment, to be like a dream, Charles Darnay
was at a loss how to answer; finally, answered not at all.

  "Now your dinner is done," Carton presently said, "why don't you
call a health, Mr. Darnay; why don't you give your toast?"

  "What health? What toast?"

  "Why, it's on the tip of your tongue. It ought to be, it must be,
I'll swear it's there."

  "Miss Manette, then!"

  "Miss Manette, then!"

  Looking his companion full in the face while he drank the toast,
Carton flung his glass over his shoulder against the wall, where it
shivered to pieces; then, rang the bell, and ordered in another.

  "That's a fair young lady to hand to a coach in the dark, Mr.
Darnay!" he said, filling his new goblet.

  A slight frown and a laconic "Yes," were the answer.

  "That's a fair young lady to be pitied by and wept for by! How
does it feel? Is it worth being tried for one's life, to be the object
of such sympathy and compassion, Mr. Darnay?"

  Again Darnay answered not a word.

  "She was mightily pleased to have your message, when I gave it
her. Not that she showed she was pleased, but I suppose she was."

  The allusion served as a timely reminder to Darnay that this
disagreeable companion had, of his own free will, assisted him in
the strait of the day. He turned the dialogue to that point, and
thanked him for it.

  "I neither want any thanks, nor merit any," was the careless
rejoinder. "It was nothing to do, in the first place; and I don't know
why I did it, in the second. Mr. Darnay, let me ask you a question."

  "Willingly, and a small return for your good offices."

  "Do you think I particularly like you?"

  "Really, Mr. Carton," returned the other, oddly disconcerted, "I
have not asked myself the question."

  "But ask yourself the question now."

  "You have acted as if you do; but I don't think you do."

  "I don't think I do," said Carton. "I begin to have a very good
opinion of your understanding."

  "Nevertheless," pursued Darnay, rising to ring the bell, "there is
nothing in that, I hope, to prevent my calling the reckoning, and
our parting without ill-blood on either side."

  Carton rejoining, "Nothing in life!" Darnay rang. "Do you call the
whole reckoning?" said Carton. On his answering in the affirmative,
"Then bring me another pint of this same wine, drawer, and come and
wake me at ten."

  The bill being paid, Charles Darnay rose and wished him good
night. Without returning the wish, Carton rose too, with something
of a threat of defiance in his manner, and said, "A last word, Mr.
Darnay: you think I am drunk?"

  "I think you have been drinking, Mr. Carton."

  "Think? You know I have been drinking."

  "Since I must say so, I know it."

  "Then you shall likewise know why. I am a disappointed drudge,
sir. I care for no man on earth, and no man on earth cares for me."

  "Much to be regretted. You might have used your talents better."

  "May be so, Mr. Darnay; may be not. Don't let your sober face
elate you, however; you don't know what it may come to. Good night!"

  When he was left alone, this strange being took up a candle, went to
a glass that hung against the wall, and surveyed himself minutely in
it.

  "Do you particularly like the man?" he muttered, at his own image;
"why should you particularly like a man who resembles you? There is
nothing in you to like; you know that. Ah, confound you! What a change
you have made in yourself! A good reason for taking to a man, that
he shows you what you have fallen away from, and what you might have
been! Change places with him, and would you have been looked at by
those blue eyes as he was, and commiserated by that agitated face as
he was? Come on, and have it out in plain words! You hate the fellow."

  He resorted to his pint of wine for consolation, drank it all in a
few minutes, and fell asleep on his arms, with his hair straggling
over the table, and a long winding-sheet in the candle dripping down
upon him.

  V

  THE JACKAL

  THOSE WERE drinking days, and most men drank hard. So very great
is the improvement Time has brought about in such habits, that a
moderate statement of the quantity of wine and punch which one man
would swallow in the course of a night, without any detriment to his
reputation as a perfect gentleman, would seem, in these days, a
ridiculous exaggeration. The learned profession of the law was
certainly not behind any other learned profession in its
Bacchanalian propensities; neither was Mr. Stryver, already fast
shouldering his way to a large and lucrative practice, behind his
compeers in this particular, any more than in the drier parts of the
legal race.

  A favourite at the Old Bailey, and eke at the Sessions, Mr.
Stryver had begun cautiously to hew away the lower staves of the
ladder on which he mounted. Sessions and Old Bailey had now to
summon their favourite, specially, to their longing arms; and
shouldering itself towards the visage of the Lord Chief Justice in the
Court of King's Bench, the florid countenance of Mr. Stryver might
be daily seen, bursting out of the bed of wigs, like a great sunflower
pushing its way at the sun from among a rank garden-full of flaring
companions.

  It had once been noted at the Bar, that while Mr. Stryver was a glib
man, and an unscrupulous, and a ready, and a bold, he had not that
faculty of extracting the essence from a heap of statements, which
is among the most striking and necessary of the advocate's
accomplishments. But, a remarkable improvement came upon him as to
this. The more business he got, the greater his power seemed to grow
of getting at its pith and marrow; and however late at night he sat
carousing with Sydney Carton, he always had his points at his fingers'
ends in the morning.

  Sydney Carton, idlest and most unpromising of men, was Stryver's
great ally. What the two drank together, between Hilary Term and
Michaelmas, might have floated a king's ship. Stryver never had a case
in hand, anywhere, but Carton was there, with his hands in his
pockets, staring at the ceiling of the court; they went the same
Circuit, and even there they prolonged their usual orgies late into
the night, and Carton was rumoured to be seen at broad day, going home
stealthily and unsteadily to his lodgings, like a dissipated cat. At
last, it began to get about, among such as were interested in the
matter, that although Sydney Carton would never be a lion, he was an
amazingly good jackal, and that he rendered suit and service to
Stryver in that humble capacity.

  "Ten o'clock, sir," said the man at the tavern, whom he had
charged to wake him- "ten o'clock, sir."

  "What's the matter?"

  "Ten o'clock, sir."

  "What do you mean? Ten o'clock at night?"

  "Yes, sir. Your honour told me to call you."

  "Oh! I remember. Very well, very well."

  After a few dull efforts to get to sleep again, which the man
dexterously combated by stirring the fire continuously for five
minutes, he got up, tossed his hat on, and walked out. He turned
into the Temple, and, having revived himself by twice pacing the
pavements of King's Bench-walk and Paper-buildings, turned into the
Stryver chambers.

  The Stryver clerk, who never assisted at these conferences, had gone
home, and the Stryver principal opened the door. He had his slippers
on, and a loose bed-gown, and his throat was bare for his greater
ease. He had that rather wild, strained, seared marking about the
eyes, which may be observed in all free livers of his class, from
the portrait of Jeffries downward, and which can be traced, under
various disguises of Art, through the portraits of every Drinking Age.

  "You are a little late, Memory," said Stryver.

  "About the usual time; it may be a quarter of an hour later."

  They went into a dingy room lined with books and littered with
papers, where there was a blazing fire. A kettle steamed upon the hob,
and in the midst of the wreck of papers a table shone, with plenty
of wine upon it, and brandy, and rum, and sugar, and lemons.

  "You have had your bottle, I perceive, Sydney."

  "Two to-night, I think. I have been dining with the day's client; or
seeing him dine- it's all one!"

  "That was a rare point, Sydney, that you brought to bear upon the
identification. How did you come by it? When did it strike you?"

  "I thought he was rather a handsome fellow, and I thought I should
have been much the same sort of fellow, if I had had any luck."

  Mr. Stryver laughed till he shook his precocious paunch.

  "You and your luck, Sydney! Get to work, get to work."

  Sullenly enough, the jackal loosened his dress, went into an
adjoining room, and came back with a large jug of cold water, a basin,
and a towel or two. Steeping the towels in the water, and partially
wringing them out, he folded them on his head in a manner hideous to
behold, sat down at the table, and said, "Now I am ready!"

  "Not much boiling down to be done to-night, Memory," said Mr.
Stryver, gaily, as he looked among his papers.

  "How much?"

  "Only two sets of them."

  "Give me the worst first."

  "There they are, Sydney. Fire away!"

  The lion then composed himself on his back on a sofa on one side
of the drinking-table, while the jackal sat at his own
paper-bestrewn table proper, on the other side of it, with the bottles
and glasses ready to his hand. Both resorted to the drinking-table
without stint, but each in a different way; the lion for the most part
reclining with his hands in his waistband, looking at the fire, or
occasionally flirting with some lighter document; the jackal, with
knitted brows and intent face, so deep in his task, that his eyes
did not even follow the hand he stretched out for his glass- which
often groped about, for a minute or more, before it found the glass
for his lips. Two or three times, the matter in hand became so knotty,
that the jackal found it imperative on him to get up, and steep his
towels anew. From these pilgrimages to the jug and basin, he
returned with such eccentricities of damp headgear as no words can
describe; which were made the more ludicrous by his anxious gravity.

  At length the jackal had got together a compact repast for the lion,
and proceeded to offer it to him. The lion took it with care and
caution, made his selections from it, and his remarks upon it, and the
jackal assisted both. When the repast was fully discussed, the lion
put his hands in his waistband again, and lay down to mediate. The
jackal then invigorated himself with a bumper for his throttle, and
a fresh application to his head, and applied himself to the collection
of a second meal; this was administered to the lion in the same
manner, and was not disposed of until the clocks struck three in the
morning.

  "And now we have done, Sydney, fill a bumper of punch," said Mr.
Stryver.

  The jackal removed the towels from his head, which had been steaming
again, shook himself, yawned, shivered, and complied.

  "You were very sound, Sydney, in the matter of those crown witnesses
to-day. Every question told."

  "I always am sound; am I not?"

  "I don't gainsay it. What has roughened your temper? Put some
punch to it and smooth it again."

  With a deprecatory grunt, the jackal again complied.

  "The old Sydney Carton of old Shrewsbury School," said Stryver,
nodding his head over him as he reviewed him in the present and the
past, "the old seesaw Sydney. Up one minute and down the next; now
in spirits and now in despondency!"

  "Ah!" returned the other, sighing: "yes! The same Sydney, with the
same luck. Even then, I did exercises for other boys, and seldom did
my own."

  "And why not?"

  "God knows. It was my way, I suppose."

  He sat, with his hands in his pockets and his legs stretched out
before him, looking at the fire.

  "Carton," said his friend, squaring himself at him with a bullying
air, as if the fire-grate had been the furnace in which sustained
endeavour was forged, and the one delicate thing to be done for the
old Sydney Carton of old Shrewsbury School was to shoulder him into
it, "your way is, and always was, a lame way. You summon no energy and
purpose. Look at me."

  "Oh, botheration!" returned Sydney, with a lighter and more
good-humoured laugh, "don't you be moral!"

  "How have I done what I have done?" said Stryver; "how do I do
what I do?"

  "Partly through paying me to help you, I suppose. But it's not worth
your while to apostrophise me, or the air, about it; what you want
to do, you do. You were always in the front rank, and I was always
behind."

  "I had to get into the front rank; I was not born there, was I?"

  "I was not present at the ceremony; but my opinion is you were,"
said Carton. At this, he laughed again, and they both laughed.

  "Before Shrewsbury, and at Shrewsbury, and ever since Shrewsbury,"
pursued Carton, "you have fallen into your rank, and I have fallen
into mine. Even when we were fellow-students in the Student-Quarter of
Paris, picking up French, and French law, and other French crumbs that
we didn't get much good of, you were always somewhere, and I was
always- nowhere."

  "And whose fault was that?"

  "Upon my soul, I am not sure that it was not yours. You were
always driving and riving and shouldering and passing, to that
restless degree that I had no chance for my life but in rust and
repose. It's a gloomy thing, however, to talk about one's own past,
with the day breaking. Turn me in some other direction before I go."

  "Well then! Pledge me to the pretty witness," said Stryver,
holding up his glass. "Are you turned in a pleasant direction?"

  Apparently not, for he became gloomy again.

  "Pretty witness," he muttered, looking down into his glass. "I
have had enough of witnesses to-day and to-night; who's your pretty
witness?"

  "The picturesque doctor's daughter, Miss Manette."

  "She pretty?"

  "Is she not?"

  "No."

  "Why, man alive, she was the admiration of the whole Court!"

  "Rot the admiration of the whole Court! Who made the Old Bailey a
judge of beauty? She was a golden-haired doll!"

  "Do you know, Sydney," said Mr. Stryver, looking at him with sharp
eyes, and slowly drawing a hand across his florid face: "do you
know, I rather thought, at the time, that you sympathised with the
golden-haired doll, and were quick to see what happened to the
golden-haired doll?"

  "Quick to see what happened! If a girl, doll or no doll, swoons
within a yard or two of a man's nose, he can see it without a
perspective-glass. I pledge you, but I deny the beauty. And now I'll
have no more drink; I'll get to bed."

  When his host followed him out on the staircase with a candle, to
light him down the stairs, the day was coldly looking in through its
grimy windows. When he got out of the house, the air was cold and sad,
the dull sky overcast, the river dark and dim, the whole scene like
a lifeless desert. And wreaths of dust were spinning round and round
before the morning blast, as if the desert-sand had risen far away,
and the first spray of it in its advance had begun to overwhelm the
city.

  Waste forces within him. and a desert all around, this man stood
still on his way across a silent terrace, and saw for a moment,
lying in the wilderness before him, a mirage honourable ambition,
self-denial, and perseverance. In the fair city of this vision,
there were airy galleries from which the loves and graces looked
upon him, gardens in which the fruits of life hung ripening, waters of
Hope that sparkled in his sight. A moment, and it was gone. Climbing
to a high chamber in a well of houses, he threw himself down in his
clothes on a neglected bed, and its pillow was wet with wasted tears.

  Sadly, sadly, the sun rose; it rose upon no sadder sight than the
man of good abilities and good emotions, incapable of their directed
exercise, incapable of his own help and his own happiness, sensible of
the blight on him, and resigning himself to let it eat him away.

  VI

  HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE

  THE QUIET LODGINGS of Doctor Manette were in a quiet street-corner
not far from Soho-square. On the afternoon of a certain fine Sunday
when the waves of four months had rolled over the trial for treason,
and carried it, as to the public interest and memory, far out to
sea, Mr. Jarvis Lorry walked along the sunny streets from
Clerkenwell where he lived, on his way to dine with the Doctor.
After several relapses into business-absorption, Mr. Lorry had
become the Doctor's friend, and the quiet street-corner was the
sunny part of his life.

  On this certain fine Sunday, Mr. Lorry walked towards Soho, early in
the afternoon, for three reasons of habit. Firstly, because, on fine
Sundays, he often walked out, before dinner, with the Doctor and
Lucie; secondly, because, on unfavourable Sundays, he was accustomed
to be with them as the family friend, talking, reading, looking out of
window, and generally getting through the day; thirdly, because be
happened to have his own little shrewd doubts to solve, and knew how
the ways of the Doctor's household pointed to that time as a likely
time for solving them.

  A quainter corner than the corner where the Doctor lived, was not to
be found in London. There was no way through it, and the front windows
of the Doctor's lodgings commanded a pleasant little vista of street
that had a congenial air of retirement on it. There were few buildings
then, north of the Oxford-road, and forest-trees flourished, and
wild flowers grew, and the hawthorn blossomed, in the now vanished
fields. As a consequence, country airs circulated in Soho with
vigorous freedom, instead of languishing into the parish like stray
paupers without a settlement; and there was many a good south wall,
not far off, on which the peaches ripened in their season.

  The summer light struck into the corner brilliantly in the earlier
part of the day; but, when the streets grew hot, the corner was in
shadow, though not in shadow so remote but that you could see beyond
it into a glare of brightness. It was a cool spot, staid but cheerful,
a wonderful place for echoes, and a very harbour from the raging
streets.

  There ought to have been a tranquil bark in such an anchorage, and
there was. The Doctor occupied two floors of a large still house,
where several callings purported to be pursued by day, but whereof
little was audible any day, and which was shunned by all of them at
night. In a building at the back, attainable by a courtyard where a
plane-tree rustled its green leaves, church-organs claimed to be made,
and silver to be chased, and likewise gold to be beaten by some
mysterious giant who had a golden arm starting out of the wall of
the front hall- as if he had beaten himself precious, and menaced a
similar conversion of all visitors. Very little of these trades, or of
a lonely lodger rumoured to live up-stairs, or of a dim coach-trimming
maker asserted to have a counting-house below, was ever heard or seen.
Occasionally, a stray workman putting his coat on, traversed the hall,
or a stranger peered about there, or a distant clink was heard
across the courtyard, or a thump from the golden giant. These,
however, were only the exceptions required to prove the rule that
the sparrows in the plane-tree behind the house, and the echoes in the
corner before it, had their own way from Sunday morning unto
Saturday night.

  Doctor Manette received such patients here as his old reputation,
and its revival in the floating whispers of his story, brought him.
His scientific knowledge, and his vigilance and skill in conducting
ingenious experiments, brought him otherwise into moderate request,
and he earned as much as he wanted.

  These things were within Mr. Jarvis Lorry's knowledge, thoughts, and
notice, when he rang the door-bell of the tranquil house in the
corner, on the fine Sunday afternoon.

  "Doctor Manette at home?"

  Expected home.

  "Miss Lucie at home?"

  Expected home.

  "Miss Pross at home?"

  Possibly at home, but of a certainty impossible for handmaid to
anticipate intentions of Miss Pross, as to admission or denial of
the fact.

  "As I am at home myself," said Mr. Lorry, "I'll go upstairs."

  Although the Doctor's daughter had known nothing of the country of
her birth, she appeared to have innately derived from it that
ability to make much of little means, which is one of its most
useful and most agreeable characteristics. Simple as the furniture
was, it was set off by so many little adornments, of no value but
for their taste and fancy, that its effect was delightful. The
disposition of everything in the rooms, from the largest object to the
least; the arrangement of colours, the elegant variety and contrast
obtained by thrift in trifles, by delicate hands, clear eyes, and good
sense; were at once so pleasant in themselves, and so expressive of
their originator, that, as Mr. Lorry stood looking about him, the very
chairs and tables seemed to ask him, with something of that peculiar
expression which he knew so well by this time, whether he approved?

  There were three rooms on a floor, and, the doors by which they
communicated being put open that the air might pass freely through
them all, Mr. Lorry, smilingly observant of that fanciful
resemblance which he detected all around him, walked from one to
another. The first was the best room, and in it were Lucie's birds,
and flowers, and books, and desk, and work-table, and box of
water-colours; the second was the Doctor's consulting-room, used
also as the dining-room; the third, changingly speckled by the
rustle of the plane-tree in the yard, was the Doctor's bedroom, and
there, in a corner, stood the disused shoemaker's bench and tray of
tools, much as it had stood on the fifth floor of the dismal house
by the wine-shop, in the suburb of Saint Antoine in Paris.

  "I wonder," said Mr. Lorry, pausing in his looking about, "that he
keeps that reminder of his sufferings about him!"

  "And why wonder at that?" was the abrupt inquiry that made him
start.

  It proceeded from Miss Pross, the wild red woman, strong of hand,
whose acquaintance he had first made at the Royal George Hotel at
Dover, and had since improved.

  "I should have thought-" Mr. Lorry began.

  "Pooh! You'd have thought!" said Miss Pross; and Mr. Lorry left off.

  "How do you do?" inquired that lady then- sharply, and yet as if
to express that she bore him no malice.

  "I am pretty well, I thank you," answered Mr. Lorry, with
meekness; "how are you?"

  "Nothing to boast of," said Miss Pross.

  "Indeed?"

  "Ah! indeed!" said Miss Pross. "I am very much put out about my
Ladybird."

  "Indeed?"

  "For gracious sake say something else besides 'indeed,' or you'll
fidget me to death," said Miss Pross: whose character (dissociated
from stature) was shortness.

  "Really, then?" said Mr. Lorry, as an amendment.

  "Really, is bad enough," returned Miss Pross, "but better. Yes, I am
very much put out."

  "May I ask the cause?"

  "I don't want dozens of people who are not at all worthy of
Ladybird, to come here looking after her," said Miss Pross.

  "Do dozens come for that purpose?"

  "Hundreds," said Miss Pross.

  It was characteristic of this lady (as of some other people before
her time and since) that whenever her original proposition was
questioned, she exaggerated it.

  "Dear me!" said Mr. Lorry, as the safest remark he could think of.

  "I have lived with the darling- or the darling has lived with me,
and paid me for it; which she certainly should never have done, you
may take your affidavit, if I could have afforded to keep either
myself or her for nothing- since she was ten years old. And it's
really very hard," said Miss Pross.

  Not seeing with precision what was very hard, Mr. Lorry shook his
head; using that important part of himself as a sort of fairy cloak
that would fit anything.

  "All sorts of people who are not in the least degree worthy of the
pet, are always turning up," said Miss Pross. "When you began it--"

  "I began it, Miss Pross?"

  "Didn't you? Who brought her father to life?"

  "Oh! If that was beginning it--" said Mr. Lorry.

  "It wasn't ending it, I suppose? I say, when you began it, it was
hard enough; not that I have any fault to find with Doctor Manette,
except that he is not worthy of such a daughter, which is no
imputation on him, for it was not to be expected that anybody should
be, under any circumstances. But it really is doubly and trebly hard
to have crowds and multitudes of people turning up after him (I
could have forgiven him), to take Ladybird's affections away from me."

  Mr. Lorry knew Miss Pross to be very jealous, but he also knew her
by this time to be, beneath the service of her eccentricity, one of
those unselfish creatures- found only among women- who will, for
pure love and admiration, bind themselves willing slaves, to youth
when they have lost it, to beauty that they never had, to
accomplishments that they were never fortunate enough to gain, to
bright hopes that never shone upon their own sombre lives. He knew
enough of the world to know that there is nothing in it better than
the faithful service of the heart; so rendered and so free from any
mercenary taint, he had such an exalted respect for it, that in the
retributive arrangements made by his own mind- we all make such
arrangements, more or less- he stationed Miss Pross much nearer to the
lower Angels than many ladies immeasurably better got up both by
Nature and Art, who had balances at Tellson's.

  "There never was, nor will be, but one man worthy of Ladybird," said
Miss Pross; "and that was my brother Solomon, if he hadn't made a
mistake in life."

  Here again: Mr. Lorry's inquiries into Miss Pross's personal history
had established the fact that her brother Solomon was a heartless
scoundrel who had stripped her of everything she possessed, as a stake
to speculate with, and had abandoned her in her poverty for
evermore, with no touch of compunction. Miss Pross's fidelity of
belief in Solomon (deducting a mere trifle for this slight mistake)
was quite a serious matter with Mr. Lorry, and had its weight in his
good opinion of her.

  "As we happen to be alone for the moment, and are both people of
business," he said, when they had got back to the drawing-room and had
sat down there in friendly relations, "Let me ask you- does the
Doctor, in talking with Lucie, never refer to the shoemaking time,
yet?"

  "Never."

  "And yet keeps that bench and those tools beside him?"

  "Ah!" returned Miss Pross, shaking her head. "But I don't say he
don't refer to it within himself."

  "Do you believe that he thinks of it much?"

  "I do," said Miss Pross.

  "Do you imagine--" Mr. Lorry had begun, when Miss Pross took him
up short with:

  "Never imagine anything. Have no imagination at all."

  "I stand corrected; do you suppose- you go so far as to suppose,
sometimes?"

  "Now and then," said Miss Pross.

  "Do you suppose," Mr. Lorry went on, with a laughing twinkle in
his bright eye, as it looked kindly at her, "that Doctor Manette has
any theory of his own, preserved through all those years, relative
to the cause of his being so oppressed; perhaps, even to the name of
his oppressor?"

  "I don't suppose anything about it but what Ladybird tells me."

  "And that is--?"

  "That she thinks he has."

  "Now don't be angry at my asking all these questions; because I am a
mere dull man of business, and you are a woman of business."

  "Dull?" Miss Pross inquired, with placidity.

  Rather wishing his modest adjective away, Mr. Lorry replied, "No,
no, no. Surely not. To return to business:- Is it not remarkable
that Doctor Manette, unquestionably innocent of any crime as we are an
well assured he is, should never touch upon that question? I will
not say with me, though he had business relations with me many years
ago, and we are now intimate; I will say with the fair daughter to
whom he is so devotedly attached, and who is so devotedly attached
to him? Believe me, Miss Pross, I don't approach the topic with you,
out of curiosity, but out of zealous interest."

  "Well! To the best of my understanding, and bad's the best, you'll
tell me," said Miss Pross, softened by the tone of the apology, "he is
afraid of the whole subject."

  "Afraid?"

  "It's plain enough, I should think, why he may be. It's a dreadful
remembrance. Besides that, his loss of himself grew out of it. Not
knowing how he lost himself, or how he recovered himself, he may never
feel certain of not losing himself again. That alone wouldn't make the
subject pleasant, I should think."

  It was a profounder remark than Mr. Lorry had looked for. "True,"
said he, "and fearful to reflect upon. Yet, a doubt lurks in my
mind, Miss Pross, whether it is good for Doctor Manette to have that
suppression always shut up within him. Indeed, it is this doubt and
the uneasiness it sometimes causes me that has led me to our present
confidence."

  "Can't be helped," said Miss Pross, shaking her head. "Touch that
string, and he instantly changes for the worse. Better leave it alone.
In short, must leave it alone, like or no like. Sometimes, he gets
up in the dead of the night, and will be heard, by us overhead
there, walking up and down, walking up and down, in his room. Ladybird
has learnt to know then that his mind is walking up and down,
walking up and down, in his old prison. She hurries to him, and they
go on together, walking up and down, walking up and down, until he
is composed. But he never says a word of the true reason of his
restlessness, to her, and she finds it best not to hint at it to
him. In silence they go walking up and down together, walking up and
down together, till her love and company have brought him to himself."

  Notwithstanding Miss Pross's denial of her own imagination, there
was a perception of the pain of being monotonously haunted by one
sad idea, in her repetition of the phrase, walking up and down,
which testified to her possessing such a thing.

  The corner has been mentioned as a wonderful corner for echoes; it
had begun to echo so resoundingly to the tread of coming feet, that it
seemed as though the very mention of that weary pacing to and fro
had set it going.

  "Here they are!" said Miss Pross, rising to break up the conference;
"and now we shall have hundreds of people pretty soon!"

  It was such a curious corner in its acoustical properties, such a
peculiar Ear of a place, that as Mr. Lorry stood at the open window,
looking for the father and daughter whose steps he heard, he fancied
they would never approach. Not only would the echoes die away, as
though the steps had gone; but, echoes of other steps that never
came would be heard in their stead, and would die away for good when
they seemed close at hand. However, father and daughter did at last
appear, and Miss Pross was ready at the street door to receive them.

  Miss Pross was a pleasant sight, albeit wild, and red, and grim,
taking off her darling's bonnet when she came up-stairs, and
touching it up with the ends of her handkerchief, and blowing the dust
off it, and folding her mantle ready for laying by, and smoothing
her rich hair with as much pride as she could possibly have taken in
her own hair if she had been the vainest and handsomest of women.
Her darling was a pleasant sight too, embracing her and thanking
her, and protesting against her taking so much trouble for her-
which last she only dared to do playfully, or Miss Pross, sorely hurt,
would have retired to her own chamber and cried. The Doctor was a
pleasant sight too, looking on at them, and telling Miss Pross how she
spoilt Lucie, in accents and with eyes that had as much spoiling in
them as Miss Pross had, and would have had more if it were possible.
Mr. Lorry was a pleasant sight too, beaming at all this in his
little wig, and thanking his bachelor stars for having lighted him
in his declining years to a Home. But, no Hundreds of people came to
see the sights, and Mr. Lorry looked in vain for the fulfilment of
Miss Pross's prediction.

  Dinner-time, and still no Hundreds of people. In the arrangements of
the little household, Miss Pross took charge of the lower regions, and
always acquitted herself marvellously. Her dinners, of a very modest
quality, were so well cooked and so well served, and so neat in
their contrivances, half English and half French, that nothing could
be better. Miss Pross's friendship being of the thoroughly practical
kind, she had ravaged Soho and the adjacent provinces, in search of
impoverished French, who, tempted by shillings and half-crowns,
would impart culinary mysteries to her. From these decayed sons and
daughters of Gaul, she had acquired such wonderful arts, that the
woman and girl who formed the staff of domestics regarded her as quite
a Sorceress, or Cinderella's Godmother: who would send out for a fowl,
a rabbit, a vegetable or two from the garden, and change them into
anything she pleased.

  On Sundays, Miss Pross dined at the Doctor's table, but on other
days persisted in taking her meals at unknown periods, either in the
lower regions, or in her own room on the second floor- a blue chamber,
to which no one but her Ladybird ever gained admittance. On this
occasion, Miss Pross, responding to Ladybird's pleasant face and
pleasant efforts to please her, unbent exceedingly; so the dinner
was very pleasant, too.

  It was an oppressive day, and, after dinner, Lucie proposed that the
wine should be carried out under the plane-tree, and they should sit
there in the air. As everything turned upon her, and revolved about
her, they went out under the plane-tree, and she carried the wine down
for the special benefit of Mr. Lorry. She had installed herself,
some time before, as Mr. Lorry's cup-bearer; and while they sat
under the plane-tree, talking, she kept his glass replenished.
Mysterious backs and ends of houses peeped at them as they talked, and
the plane-tree whispered to them in its own way above their heads.

  Still, the Hundreds of people did not present themselves. Mr. Darnay
presented himself while they were sitting under the plane-tree, but he
was only One.

  Doctor Manette received him kindly, and so did Lucie. But, Miss
Pross suddenly became afflicted with a twitching in the head and body,
and retired into the house. She was not unfrequently the victim of
this disorder, and she called it, in familiar conversation, "a fit
of the jerks."

  The Doctor was in his best condition, and looked specially young.
The resemblance between him and Lucie was very strong at such times,
and as they sat side by side, she leaning on his shoulder, and he
resting his arm on the back of her chair, it was very agreeable to
trace the likeness.

  He had been talking all day, on many subjects, and with unusual
vivacity. "Pray, Doctor Manette," said Mr. Darnay, as they sat under
the plane-tree- and he said it in the natural pursuit of the topic
in hand, which happened to be the old buildings of London- "have you
seen much of the Tower?"

  "Lucie and I have been there; but only casually. We have seen enough
of it, to know that it teems with interest; little more."

  "I have been there, as you remember," said Darnay, with a smile,
though reddening a little angrily, "in another character, and not in a
character that gives facilities for seeing much of it. They told me
a curious thing when I was there."

  "What was that?" Lucie asked.

  "In making some alterations, the workmen came upon an old dungeon,
which had been, for many years, built up and forgotten. Every stone of
its inner wall was covered by inscriptions which had been carved by
prisoners- dates, names, complaints, and prayers. Upon a corner
stone in an angle of the wall, one prisoner, who seemed to have gone
to execution, had cut as his last work, three letters. They were
done with some very poor instrument, and hurriedly, with an unsteady
hand. At first, they were read as D. I. C.; but, on being more
carefully examined, the last letter was found to be G.  There was no
record or legend of any prisoner with those initials, and many
fruitless guesses were made what the name could have been. At
length, it was suggested that the letters were not initials, but the
complete word, DIG. The floor was examined very carefully under the
inscription, and, in the earth beneath a stone, or tile, or some
fragment of paving, were found the ashes of a paper, mingled with
the ashes of a small leathern case or bag. What the unknown prisoner
had written will never be read, but he had written something, and
hidden it away to keep it from the gaoler."

  "My father," exclaimed Lucie, "you are ill!"

  He had suddenly started up, with his hand to his head. His manner
and his look quite terrified them all.

  "No, my dear, not ill. There are large drops of rain falling, and
they made me start. We had better go in."

  He recovered himself almost instantly. Rain was really falling in
large drops, and he showed the back of his hand with rain-drops on it.
But, he said not a single word in reference to the discovery that had
been told of, and, as they went into the house, the business eye of
Mr. Lorry either detected, or fancied it detected, on his face, as it
turned towards Charles Darnay, the same singular look that had been
upon it when it turned towards him in the passages of the Court House.

  He recovered himself so quickly, however, that Mr. Lorry had
doubts of his business eye. The arm of the golden giant in the hall
was not more steady than he was, when he stopped under it to remark to
them that he was not yet proof against slight surprises (if he ever
would be), and that the rain had startled him.

  Tea-time, and Miss Pross making tea, with another fit of the jerks
upon her, and yet no Hundreds of people. Mr. Carton had lounged in,
but he made only Two.

  The night was so very sultry, that although they sat with doors
and windows open, they were overpowered by heat. When the tea-table
was done with, they all moved to one of the windows, and looked out
into the heavy twilight. Lucie sat by her father; Darnay sat beside
her; Carton leaned against a window. The curtains were long and white,
and some of the thunder-gusts that whirled into the corner, caught
them up to the ceiling, and waved them like spectral wings.

  "The rain-drops are still falling, large, heavy, and few," said
Doctor Manette. "It comes slowly."

  "It comes surely," said Carton.

  They spoke low, as people watching and waiting mostly do; as
people in a dark room, watching and waiting for Lightning, always do.

  There was a great hurry in the streets of people speeding away to
get shelter before the storm broke; the wonderful corner for echoes
resounded with the echoes of footsteps coming and going, yet not a
footstep was there.

  "A multitude of people, and yet a solitude!" said Darnay, when
they had listened for a while.

  "Is it not impressive, Mr. Darnay?" asked Lucie. "Sometimes, I
have sat here of an evening, until I have fancied- but even the
shade of a foolish fancy makes me shudder to-night, when all is so
black and solemn--"

  "Let us shudder too. We may know what it is."

  "It will seem nothing to you. Such whims are only impressive as we
originate them, I think; they are not to be communicated. I have
sometimes sat alone here of an evening, listening, until I have made
the echoes out to be the echoes of all the footsteps that are coming
by-and-bye into our lives."

  "There is a great crowd coming one day into our lives, if that be
so," Sydney Carton struck in, in his moody way.

  The footsteps were incessant, and the hurry of them became more
and more rapid. The corner echoed and re-echoed with the tread of
feet; some, as it seemed, under the windows; some, as it seemed, in
the room; some coming, some going, some breaking off, some stopping
altogether; all in the distant streets, and not one within sight.

  "Are all these footsteps destined to come to all of us, Miss
Manette, or are we to divide them among us?"

  "I don't know, Mr. Darnay; I told you it was a foolish fancy, but
you asked for it. When I have yielded myself to it, I have been alone,
and then I have imagined them the footsteps of the people who are to
come into my life, and my father's."

  "I take them into mine!" said Carton. "I ask no questions and make
no stipulations. There is a great crowd bearing down upon us, Miss
Manette, and I see them-- by the Lightning." He added the last
words, after there had been a vivid flash which had shown him lounging
in the window.

  "And I hear them!" he added again, after a peal of thunder. "Here
they come, fast, fierce, and furious!"

  It was the rush and roar of rain that he typified, and it stopped
him, for no voice could be heard in it. A memorable storm of thunder
and lightning broke with that sweep of water, and there was not a
moment's interval in crash, and fire, and rain, until after the moon
rose at midnight.

  The great bell of Saint Paul's was striking One in the cleared
air, when Mr. Lorry, escorted by Jerry, high-booted and bearing a
lantern, set forth on his return-passage to Clerkenwell. There were
solitary patches of road on the way between Soho and Clerkenwell,
and Mr. Lorry, mindful of foot-pads, always retained Jerry for this
service: though it was usually performed a good two hours earlier.

  "What a night it has been! Almost a night, Jerry," said Mr. Lorry,
"to bring the dead out of their graves."

  "I never see the night myself, master- nor yet I don't expect to-
what would do that," answered Jerry.

  "Good night, Mr. Carton," said the man of business. "Good night, Mr.
Darnay. Shall we ever see such a night again, together!"

  Perhaps. Perhaps, see the great crowd of people with its rush and
roar, bearing down upon them, too.

  VII

  MONSEIGNEUR IN TOWN

  MONSEIGNEUR, one of the great lords in power at the Court, held
his fortnightly reception in his grand hotel in Paris. Monseigneur was
in his inner room, his sanctuary of sanctuaries, the Holiest of
Holiests to the crowd of worshippers in the suite of rooms without.
Monseigneur was about to take his chocolate. Monseigneur could swallow
a great many things with ease, and was by some few sullen minds
supposed to be rather rapidly swallowing France; but, his morning's
chocolate could not so much as get into the throat of Monseigneur,
without the aid of four strong men besides the Cook.

  Yes. It took four men, all four ablaze with gorgeous decoration, and
the Chief of them unable to exist with fewer than two gold watches
in his pocket, emulative of the noble and chaste fashion set by
Monseigneur, to conduct the happy chocolate to Monseigneur's lips. One
lacquey carried the chocolate-pot into the sacred presence; a
second, milled and frothed the chocolate with the little instrument he
bore for that function; a third, presented the favoured napkin; a
fourth (he of the two gold watches), poured the chocolate out. It
was impossible for Monseigneur to dispense with one of these
attendants on the chocolate and hold his high place under the admiring
Heavens. Deep would have been the blot upon his escutcheon if his
chocolate had been ignobly waited on by only three men; he must have
died of two.

  Monseigneur had been out at a little supper last night, where the
Comedy and the Grand Opera were charmingly represented. Monseigneur
was out at a little supper most nights, with fascinating company. So
polite and so impressible was Monseigneur, that the Comedy and the
Grand Opera had far more influence with him in the tiresome articles
of state affairs and state secrets, than the needs of all France. A
happy circumstance for France, as the like always is for all countries
similarly favoured!- always was for England (by way of example), in
the regretted days of the merry Stuart who sold it.

  Monseigneur had one truly noble idea of general public business,
which was, to let everything go on in its own way; of particular
public business, Monseigneur had the other truly noble idea that it
must all go his way- tend to his own power and pocket. Of his
pleasures, general and particular, Monseigneur had the other truly
noble idea, that the world was made for them. The text of his order
(altered from the original by only a pronoun, which is not much)
ran: "The earth and the fulness thereof are mine, saith Monseigneur."

  Yet, Monseigneur had slowly found that vulgar embarrassments crept
into his affairs, both private and public; and he had, as to both
classes of affairs, allied himself perforce with a Farmer-General.
As to finances public, because Monseigneur could not make anything
at all of them, and must consequently let them out to somebody who
could; as to finances private, because Farmer-Generals were rich,
and Monseigneur, after generations of great luxury and expense, was
growing poor. Hence Monseigneur had taken his sister from a convent,
while there was yet time to ward off the impending veil, the
cheapest garment she could wear, and had bestowed her as a prize
upon a very rich Farmer-General, poor in family. Which Farmer-General,
carrying an appropriate cane with a golden apple on the top of it, was
now among the company in the outer rooms, much prostrated before by
mankind- always excepting superior mankind of the blood of
Monseigneur, who, his own wife included, looked down upon him with the
loftiest contempt.

  A sumptuous man was the Farmer-General. Thirty horses stood in his
stables, twenty-four male domestics sat in his halls, six body-women
waited on his wife. As one who pretended to do nothing but plunder and
forage where he could, the Farmer-General- howsoever his matrimonial
relations conduced to social morality- was at least the greatest
reality among the personages who attended at the hotel of
Monseigneur that day.

  For, the rooms, though a beautiful scene to look at, and adorned
with every device of decoration that the taste and skin of the time
could achieve, were, in truth, not a sound business; considered with
any reference to the scarecrows in the rags and nightcaps elsewhere
(and not so far off, either, but that the watching towers of Notre
Dame, almost equidistant from the two extremes, could see them
both), they would have been an exceedingly uncomfortable business-
if that could have been anybody's business, at the house of
Monseigneur. Military officers destitute of military knowledge;
naval officers with no idea of a ship; civil officers without a notion
of affairs; brazen ecclesiastics, of the worst world worldly, with
sensual eyes, loose tongues, and looser lives; all totally unfit for
their several callings all lying horribly in pretending to belong to
them, but all nearly or remotely of the order of Monseigneur, and
therefore foisted on all public employments from which anything was to
be got; these were to be told off by the score and the score. People
not immediately connected with Monseigneur or the State, yet equally
unconnected with anything that was real, or with lives passed in
travelling by any straight road to any true earthly end, were no
less abundant. Doctors who made great fortunes out of dainty
remedies for imaginary disorders that never existed, smiled upon their
courtly patients in the ante-chambers of Monseigneur. Projectors who
had discovered every kind of remedy for the little evils with which
the State was touched, except the remedy of setting to work in earnest
to root out a single sin, poured their distracting babble into any
ears they could lay hold of, at the reception of Monseigneur.
Unbelieving Philosophers who were remodelling the world with words,
and making card-towers of Babel to scale the skies with, talked with
Unbelieving Chemists who had an eye on the transmutation of metals, at
this wonderful gathering accumulated by Monseigneur. Exquisite
gentlemen of the finest breeding, which was at that remarkable time-
and has been since- to be known by its fruits of indifference to every
natural subject of human interest, were in the most exemplary state of
exhaustion, at the hotel of Monseigneur. Such homes had these
various notabilities left behind them in the fine world of Paris, that
the spies among the assembled devotees of Monseigneur- forming a
goodly half of the polite company- would have found it hard to
discover among the angels of that sphere one solitary wife, who, in
her manners and appearance, owned to being a Mother. Indeed, except
for the mere act of bringing a troublesome creature into this world-
which does not go far towards the realisation of the name of mother-
there was no such thing known to the fashion. Peasant women kept the
unfashionable babies close, and brought them up, and charming
grandmammas of sixty dressed and supped as at twenty.

  The leprosy of unreality disfigured every human creature in
attendance upon Monseigneur. In the outermost room were half a dozen
exceptional people who had had, for a few years, some vague
misgiving in them that things in general were going rather wrong. As a
promising way of setting them right, half of the half-dozen had become
members of a fantastic sect of Convulsionists, and were even then
considering within themselves whether they should foam, rage, roar,
and turn cataleptic on the spot- thereby setting up a highly
intelligible finger-post to the Future, for Monseigneur's guidance.
Besides these Dervishes, were other three who had rushed into
another sect, which mended matters with a jargon about "the Centre
of Truth:" holding that Man had got out of the Centre of Truth-
which did not need much demonstration- but had not got out of the
Circumference, and that he was to be kept from flying out of the
Circumference, and was even to be shoved back into the Centre, by
fasting and seeing of spirits. Among these, accordingly, much
discoursing with spirits went on- and it did a world of good which
never became manifest.

  But, the comfort was, that all the company at the grand hotel of
Monseigneur were perfectly dressed. If the Day of Judgment had only
been ascertained to be a dress day, everybody there would have been
eternally correct. Such frizzling and powdering and sticking up of
hair, such delicate complexions artificially preserved and mended,
such gallant swords to look at, and such delicate honour to the
sense of smell, would surely keep anything going, for ever and ever.
The exquisite gentlemen of the finest breeding wore little pendent
trinkets that chinked as they languidly moved; these golden fetters
rang like precious little bells; and what with that ringing, and
with the rustle of silk and brocade and fine linen, there was a
flutter in the air that fanned Saint Antoine and his devouring
hunger far away.

  Dress was the one unfailing talisman and charm used for keeping
all things in their places. Everybody was dressed for a Fancy Ball
that was never to leave off. From the Palace of the Tuileries, through
Monseigneur and the whole Court, through the Chambers, the Tribunals
of Justice, and all society (except the scarecrows), the Fancy Ball
descended to the Common Executioner: who, in pursuance of the charm,
was required to officiate "frizzled, powdered, in a gold-laced coat,
pumps, and white silk stockings." At the gallows and the wheel-the axe
was a rarity- Monsieur Paris, as it was the episcopal mode among his
brother Professors of the provinces, Monsieur Orleans, and the rest,
to call him, presided in this dainty dress. And who among the
company at Monseigneur's reception in that seventeen hundred and
eightieth year of our Lord, could possibly doubt, that a system rooted
in a frizzled hangman, powdered, gold-laced, pumped, and white-silk
stockinged, would see the very stars out!

  Monseigneur having eased his four men of their burdens and taken his
chocolate, caused the doors of the Holiest of Holiests to be thrown
open, and issued forth. Then, what submission, what cringing and
fawning, what servility, what abject humiliation! As to bowing down in
body and spirit, nothing in that way was left for Heaven- which may
have been one among other reasons why the worshippers of Monseigneur
never troubled it.

  Bestowing a word of promise here and a smile there, a whisper on one
happy slave and a wave of the hand on another, Monseigneur affably
passed through his rooms to the remote region of the Circumference
of Truth. There, Monseigneur turned, and came back again, and so in
due course of time got himself shut up in his sanctuary by the
chocolate sprites, and was seen no more.

  The show being over, the flutter in the air became quite a little
storm, and the precious little bells went ringing down-stairs. There
was soon but one person left of all the crowd, and he, with his hat
under his arm and his snuff-box in his hand, slowly passed among the
mirrors on his way out.

  "I devote you," said this person, stopping at the last door on his
way, and turning in the direction of the sanctuary, "to the Devil!"

  With that, he shook the snuff from his fingers as if he had shaken
the dust from his feet, and quietly walked down-stairs.

  He was a man of about sixty, handsomely dressed, haughty in
manner, and with a face like a fine mask. A face of a transparent
paleness; every feature in it clearly defined; one set expression on
it. The nose, beautifully formed otherwise, was very slightly
pinched at the top of each nostril. In those two compressions, or
dints, the only little change that the face ever showed, resided. They
persisted in changing colour sometimes, and they would be occasionally
dilated and contracted by something like a faint pulsation; then, they
gave a look of treachery, and cruelty, to the whole countenance.
Examined with attention, its capacity of helping such a look was to be
found in the line of the mouth, and the lines of the orbits of the
eyes, being much too horizontal and thin; still, in the effect of
the face made, it was a handsome face, and a remarkable one.

  Its owner went down-stairs into the courtyard, got into his
carriage, and drove away. Not many people had talked with him at the
reception; he had stood in a little space apart, and Monseigneur might
have been warmer in his manner. It appeared, under the
circumstances, rather agreeable to him to see the common people
dispersed before his horses, and often barely escaping from being
run down. His man drove as if he were charging an enemy, and the
furious recklessness of the man brought no check into the face, or
to the lips, of the master. The complaint had sometimes made itself
audible, even in that deaf city and dumb age, that, in the narrow
streets without footways, the fierce patrician custom of hard
driving endangered and maimed the mere vulgar in a barbarous manner.
But, few cared enough for that to think of it a second time, and, in
this matter, as in all others, the common wretches were left to get
out of their difficulties as they could.

  With a wild rattle and clatter, and an inhuman abandonment of
consideration not easy to be understood in these days, the carriage
dashed through streets and swept round corners, with women screaming
before it, and men clutching each other and clutching children out
of its way. At last, swooping at a street corner by a fountain, one of
its wheels came to a sickening little jolt, and there was a loud cry
from a number of voices, and the horses reared and plunged.

  But for the latter inconvenience, the carriage probably would not
have stopped; carriages were often known to drive on, and leave
their wounded behind, and why not? But the frightened valet had got
down in a hurry, and there were twenty hands at the horses' bridles.

  "What has gone wrong?" said Monsieur, calmly looking out.

  A tall man in a nightcap had caught up a bundle from among the
feet of the horses, and had laid it on the basement of the fountain,
and was down in the mud and wet, howling over it like a wild animal.

  "Pardon, Monsieur the Marquis!" said a ragged and submissive man,
"it is a child."

  "Why does he make that abominable noise? Is it his child?"

  "Excuse me, Monsieur the Marquis- it is a pity- yes."

  The fountain was a little removed; for the street opened, where it
was, into a space some ten or twelve yards square. As the tall man
suddenly got up from the ground, and came running at the carriage,
Monsieur the Marquis clapped his hand for an instant on his
sword-hilt.

  "Killed!" shrieked the man, in wild desperation, extending both arms
at their length above his head, and staring at him. "Dead!"

  The people closed round, and looked at Monsieur the Marquis. There
was nothing revealed by the many eyes that looked at him but
watchfulness and eagerness; there was no visible menacing or anger.
Neither did the people say anything; after the first cry, they had
been silent, and they remained so. The voice of the submissive man who
had spoken, was flat and tame in its extreme submission. Monsieur
the Marquis ran his eyes over them all, as if they had been mere
rats come out of their holes.

  He took out his purse.

  "It is extraordinary to me," said he, "that you people cannot take
care of yourselves and your children. One or the other of you is for
ever in the way. How do I know what injury you have done my horses.
See! Give him that."

  He threw out a gold coin for the valet to pick up, and all the heads
craned forward that all the eyes might look down at it as it fell. The
tall man called out again with a most unearthly cry, "Dead!"

  He was arrested by the quick arrival of another man, for whom the
rest made way. On seeing him, the miserable creature fell upon his
shoulder, sobbing and crying, and pointing to the fountain, where some
women were stooping over the motionless bundle, and moving gently
about it. They were as silent, however, as the men.

  "I know all, I know all," said the last comer. "Be a brave man, my
Gaspard! It is better for the poor little plaything to die so, than to
live. It has died in a moment without pain. Could it have lived an
hour as happily?"

  "You are a philosopher, you there," said the Marquis, smiling.
"How do they call you?"

  "They call me Defarge."

  "Of what trade?"

  "Monsieur the Marquis, vendor of wine."

  "Pick up that, philosopher and vendor of wine," said the Marquis,
throwing him another gold coin, "and spend it as you will. The
horses there; are they right?"

  Without deigning to look at the assemblage a second time, Monsieur
the Marquis leaned back in his seat, and was just being driven away
with the air of a gentleman who had accidentally broke some common
thing, and had paid for it, and could afford to pay for it; when his
ease was suddenly disturbed by a coin flying into his carriage, and
ringing on its floor.

  "Hold!" said Monsieur the Marquis. "Hold the horses! Who threw
that?"

  He looked to the spot where Defarge the vendor of wine had stood,
a moment before; but the wretched father was grovelling on his face on
the pavement in that spot, and the figure that stood beside him was
the figure of a dark stout woman, knitting.

  "You dogs!" said the Marquis, but smoothly, and with an unchanged
front, except as to the spots on his nose: "I would ride over any of
you very willingly, and exterminate you from the earth. If I knew
which rascal threw at the carriage, and if that brigand were
sufficiently near it, he should be crushed under the wheels."

  So cowed was their condition, and so long and hard their
experience of what such a man could do to them, within the law and
beyond it, that not a voice, or a hand, or even an eye was raised.
Among the men, not one. But the woman who stood knitting looked up
steadily, and looked the Marquis in the face. It was not for his
dignity to notice it; his contemptuous eyes passed over her, and
over all the other rats; and he leaned back in his seat again, and
gave the word "Go on!"

  He was driven on, and other carriages came whirling by in quick
succession; the Minister, the State-Projector, the Farmer-General, the
Doctor, the Lawyer, the Ecclesiastic, the Grand Opera, the Comedy, the
whole Fancy Ball in a bright continuous flow, came whirling by. The
rats had crept out of their holes to look on, and they remained
looking on for hours; soldiers and police often passing between them
and the spectacle, and making a barrier behind which they slunk, and
through which they peeped. The father had long ago taken up his bundle
and hidden himself away with it, when the women who had tended the
bundle while it lay on the base of the fountain, sat there watching
the running of the water and the rolling of the Fancy Ball- when the
one woman who had stood conspicuous, knitting, still knitted on with
the steadfastness of Fate. The water of the fountain ran, the swift
river ran, the day ran into evening, so much life in the city ran into
death according to rule, time and tide waited for no man, the rats
were sleeping close together in their dark holes again, the Fancy Ball
was lighted up at supper, all things ran their course.

  VIII

  MONSEIGNEUR IN THE COUNTRY

  A BEAUTIFUL LANDSCAPE, with the corn bright in it, but not abundant.
Patches of poor rye where corn should have been, patches of poor
peas and beans, patches of most coarse vegetable substitutes for
wheat. On inanimate nature, as on the men and women who cultivated it,
a prevalent tendency towards an appearance of vegetating
unwillingly- a dejected disposition to give up, and wither away.

  Monsieur the Marquis in his travelling carriage (which might have
been lighter), conducted by four post-horses and two postilions,
fagged up a steep hill. A blush on the countenance of Monsieur the
Marquis was no impeachment of his high breeding; it was not from
within; it was occasioned by an external circumstance beyond his
control- the setting sun.

  The sunset struck so brilliantly into the travelling carriage when
it gained the hill-top, that its occupant was steeped in crimson.
"It will die out," said Monsieur the Marquis, glancing at his hands,
"directly."

  In effect, the sun was so low that it dipped at the moment. When the
heavy drag had been adjusted to the wheel, and the carriage slid
down hill, with a cinderous smell, in a cloud of dust, the red glow
departed quickly; the sun and the Marquis going down together, there
was no glow left when the drag was taken off.

  But, there remained a broken country, bold and open, a little
village at the bottom of the hill, a broad sweep and rise beyond it, a
churchtower, a windmill, a forest for the chase, and a crag with a
fortress on it used as a prison. Round upon all these darkening
objects as the night drew on, the Marquis looked, with the air of
one who was coming near home.

  The village had its one poor street, with its poor brewery, poor
tannery, poor tavern, poor stable-yard for relays of post-horses, poor
fountain, all usual poor appointments. It had its poor people too. All
poor a its people were poor, and many of them were sitting at their
doors, shredding spare onions and the like for supper, while many were
at the fountain, washing leaves, and grasses, and any such small
yieldings of the earth that could be eaten. Expressive signs of what
made them poor, were not wanting; the tax for the state, the tax for
the church, the tax for the lord, tax local and tax general, were to
be paid here and to be paid there, according to solemn inscription
in the little village, until the wonder was, that there was any
village left unswallowed.

  Few children were to be seen, and no dogs. As to the men and
women, their choice on earth was stated in the prospect- Life on the
lowest terms that could sustain it, down in the little village under
the ill; or captivity and Death in the dominant prison on the crag.

  Heralded by a courier in advance, and by the cracking of his
postilions' whips, which twined snake-like about their heads in the
evening air, as if he came attended by the Furies, Monsieur the
Marquis drew up in his travelling carriage at the posting-house
gate. It was hard by the fountain, and the peasants suspended their
operations to look at him. He looked at them, and saw in them, without
knowing it, the slow sure filing down of misery-worn face and
figure, that was to make the meagreness of Frenchmen an English
superstition which should survive the truth through the best part of a
hundred years.

  Monsieur the Marquis cast his eyes over the submissive faces that
drooped before him, as the like of himself had drooped before
Monseigneur of the Court- only the difference was, that these faces
drooped merely to suffer and not to propitiate- when a grizzled mender
of the roads joined the group.

  "Bring me hither that fellow!" said the Marquis to the courier.

  The fellow was brought, cap in hand, and the other fellows closed
round to look and listen, in the manner of the people at the Paris
fountain.

  "I passed you on the road?"

  "Monseigneur, it is true. I had the honour of being passed on the
road."

  "Coming up the hill, and at the top of the hill, both?

  "Monseigneur, it is true."

  "What did you look at, so fixedly?"

  "Monseigneur, I looked at the man."

  He stooped a little, and with his tattered blue cap pointed under
the carriage. All his fellows stooped to look under the carriage.

  "What man, pig? And why look there?"

  "Pardon, Monseigneur; he swung by the chain of the shoe- the drag."

  "Who?" demanded the traveller.

  "Monseigneur, the man."

  "May the Devil carry away these idiots! How do you call the man? You
know all the men of this part of the country. Who was he?"

  "Your clemency, Monseigneur! He was not of this part of the country.
Of all the days of my life, I never saw him."

  "Swinging by the chain? To be suffocated?"

  "With your gracious permission, that was the wonder of it,
Monseigneur. His head hanging over- like this!"

  He turned himself sideways to the carriage, and leaned back, with
his face thrown up to the sky, and his head hanging down; then
recovered himself, fumbled with his cap, and made a bow.

  "What was he like?"

  "Monseigneur, he was whiter than the miller. All covered with
dust, white as a spectre, tall as a spectre!"

  The picture produced an immense sensation in the little crowd; but
all eyes, without comparing notes with other eyes, looked at
Monsieur the Marquis. Perhaps, to observe whether he had any spectre
on his conscience.

  "Truly, you did well," said the Marquis, felicitously sensible
that such vermin were not to ruffle him, "to see a thief
accompanying my carriage, and not open that great mouth of yours. Bah!
Put him aside, Monsieur Gabelle!"

  Monsieur Gabelle was the Postmaster, and some other taxing
functionary united; he had come out with great obsequiousness to
assist at this examination, and had held the examined by the drapery
of his arm in an official manner.

  "Bah! Go aside!" said Monsieur Gabelle.

  "Lay hands on this stranger if he seeks to lodge in your village
to-night, and be sure that his business is honest, Gabelle."

  "Monseigneur, I am flattered to devote myself to your orders."

  "Did he run away, fellow?- where is that Accursed?"

  The accursed was already under the carriage with some half-dozen
particular friends, pointing out the chain with his blue cap. Some
half-dozen other particular friends promptly hauled him out, and
presented him breathless to Monsieur the Marquis.

  "Did the man run away, Dolt, when we stopped for the drag?"

  "Monseigneur, he precipitated himself over the hill-side, head
first, as a person plunges into the river."

  "See to it, Gabelle. Go on!"

  The half-dozen who were peering at the chain were still among the
wheels, like sheep; the wheels turned so suddenly that they were lucky
to save their skins and bones; they had very little else to save, or
they might not have been so fortunate.

  The burst with which the carriage started out of the village and
up the rise beyond, was soon checked by the steepness of the hill.
Gradually, it subsided to a foot pace, swinging and lumbering upward
among the many sweet scents of a summer night. The postilions, with
a thousand gossamer gnats circling about them in lieu of the Furies,
quietly mended the points to the lashes of their whips; the valet
walked by the horses; the courier was audible, trotting on ahead
into the dim distance.

  At the steepest point of the hill there was a little
burial-ground, with a Cross and a new large figure of Our Saviour on
it; it was a poor figure in wood, done by some inexperienced rustic
carver, but he had studied the figure from the life- his own life,
maybe- for it was dreadfully spare and thin.

  To this distressful emblem of a great distress that had long been
growing worse, and was not at its worst, a woman was kneeling. She
turned her head as the carriage came up to her, rose quickly, and
presented herself at the carriage-door.

  "It is you, Monseigneur! Monseigneur, a petition."

  With an exclamation of impatience, but with his unchangeable face,
Monseigneur looked out.

  "How, then! What is it? Always petitions!"

  "Monseigneur. For the love of the great God! My husband, the
forester."

  "What of your husband, the forester? Always the same with you
people. He cannot pay something?"

  "He has paid all, Monseigneur. He is dead."

  "Well! He is quiet. Can I restore him to you?"

  "Alas, no, Monseigneur! But he lies yonder, under a little heap of
poor grass."

  "Well?"

  "Monseigneur, there are so many little heaps of poor grass?"

  "Again, well?"

  She looked an old woman, but was young. Her manner was one of
passionate grief; by turns she clasped her veinous and knotted hands
together with wild energy, and laid one of them on the
carriage-door- tenderly, caressingly, as if it had been a human
breast, and could be expected to feel the appealing touch.
